---
layout: post
title:  "April - This Month in Minetest (03)"
author: rubenwardy
contributors: ["Warr1024"]
description: >
  Mapgen Work, Main Menu Redesign
image: /static/blog/2022_March/Sunrays.png
tags:
  - this_month
split_login_register:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_April/split_login_register_1.png
    caption: Split login and register

  - src: /static/blog/2022_April/split_login_register_2.png
    caption: New register dialog, replacing the confirmation dialog
---

This month, engine development picks up with regular meetings,
NodeCore gets a 24/7 livestream, and the Minetest Blog is now official!

<!-- more -->

*  [Engine](#engine)
*  [Games](#games)
*  [Mods](#mods)
*  [Art/Builds](#art)
*  [In Other News](#o-news)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### Regular Meetings and Triagers

Engine development has suffered from too many issues and Pull Requests compared
to available developer hours for a long time. At the start of April, the engine
had over 130 Pull Requests (PRs) and 1.1k issues. In order to resolve this, and
to speed up development, Minetest developers have started fortnightly meetings.

Core dev meetings provide a time when multiple core developers are around to
discuss issues, changes, and development direction. As Minetest is an
open-source project, it's important that the development is done publicly and
transparently. Meetings take place on
[Internet Relay Chat](https://wiki.minetest.net/IRC) (IRC) and are publicly
logged, allowing anyone to watch or participate. Meetings follow a plan arranged
prior to the meeting;
[meeting plans and notes](https://dev.minetest.net/Meetings) can be found on the
dev wiki.

Another organisational change is that Zughy has joined the team as a triager.
Triagers label and otherwise manage issues. The triager system was introduced
a couple of years ago but was never actively used. Zughy has already made huge
progress in organising older issues, and we're likely to be adding more
triagers soon.

### Last Month's Development

April saw 30 PRs merged and 75 issues closed.

Development largely consisted of bug fixes, minor features, and continued
improvements to the graphics pipeline. One major change was adding proper
transparency sorting, this has fixed many glitches related to viewing
transparent materials through other transparent materials. Examples of
transparent materials include liquids, glass, and leaves.

### Upcoming Development

One of the areas in which Minetest is lacking is User Experience (UX). New users
frequently get confused about how to sign up for a server.

In 5.1.0, a confirm password dialog was added in an attempt to make it more
clear when a user is creating an account. However, this change was largely
disliked and was ineffective at improving the user experience - users were still
confused about how to create accounts, and the dialog just added to the
confusion.

To resolve these problems, core developers have agreed to change the user
interface to include a separate register and login button. This matches user
expectations as most services include separate register and log in. The user can
log into a server the same as before, and the register button takes the user to
a new dialog that replaces the confirmation dialog. And pro users need not
worry, as there's a setting to return to the previous behaviour.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.split_login_register %}

Another feature currently under review is sfan5's
[async modding API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/11131). This will
allow mods to run code on multiple threads, speeding up calculation heavy tasks
like precalculating mapgen and train routes by
[Advanced Trains](https://content.minetest.net/packages/orwell/advtrains/).
There are caveats: writing async code is harder than sync code, and the async
API cannot access most data including the map and players. It's mostly for
offloading calculations from the main thread.

## Game News <a name="games"></a>

### Repixture 2.0

Wuzzy has released [Repixture 2.0](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Wuzzy/repixture/).
There's not many player-facing changes, but there's been a lot of work to
redesign the structure of the game to make it easier to mod.

## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>

### Perlin Explorer

Wuzzy has released
[Perlin Explorer](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Wuzzy/perlin_explorer/),
a mod that allows you to test and experiment with Perlin noises.  This is
especially useful for game and mod developers who want to fine-tune the noises
in an efficient manner. It’s also useful to discover useful noise parameters for
the various mapgen settings in Minetest.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/perlin_explorer.png" caption="Perlin Explorer's dialog" %}

### Mesecons becomes game-independent

Mesecons is one of Minetest's most popular mods, but until now has been entirely
dependent on Minetest Game. TurkeyMcMac is
[making mesecons independent from MTG](https://github.com/minetest-mods/mesecons/pull/607),
which means that you'll be able to play it with more games soon.

## Art and Builds <a name="art"></a>


Amazing builds, Minetest-related art

## Server Spotlight <a name="s-spotlight"></a>


If there is a server that wants to be advertised here, A paragraph and screenshots.
One server per article

## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

Small news blips for servers in general. Great for announcing new servers, server events, major server updates, etc.

### NodeCore Community: Automatic Livestream

Warr1024 has created a 24/7 [livestream](https://www.twitch.tv/NodeCoreMT)
of his NodeCore server. The livestream
is entirely automated, choosing camera angles and players to focus on.

{% include video.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/stream-demo.mp4" format="video/mp4" caption="A preview of the livestream" %}

[NodeCore](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Warr1024/nodecore/)
is a game about emergent behaviour and exploration:

> A surreal dream-world where everything is possible but nothing is easy.
> Peaceful and Zen. Brutally obstinate. Prepare to unlearn everything you
> thought you knew about voxel sandbox games.

The livestreaming software consists of
[Docker services](https://gitlab.com/sztest/minetestcast) to run and stream
Minetest, and a
[server-side mod](https://gitlab.com/sztest/szutilpack/-/tree/master/szutil_cinecam)
to control the camera. The mod chooses an angle to look at the player, and
assesses whether it is viable based on distance and line-of-sight.


## In Other News <a name="s-news"></a>

The Minetest Blog is now official! It has also received a redesign, thanks
to rubenwardy.
