---
layout: post
title: "November - Last Month in Minetest (09)"
authors: [MisterE]
editors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - Apercy
  - Komodo
  - Zughy
  - Giov4
  - Heather
  - Lemente
  - Thomate
  - Troodon
  - Keihdra
  - Kiopy7
  - Debiankaios
  - W3RQ01
  - y5nw
description: >
  November was the 2022 Game jam month; there were some great submissions
  this year! Core devs worked on graphics and gamepad support. In late
  October, Minetest was used as an urban planning tool to engage students
  in their community's planning process.
image: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_cover.png
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28956
tags:
  - last_month
glitch:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_1.png
    caption: Part of the intro

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_2.png
    caption: The Hub
motorcycles:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/auto_cycle.png
    caption: Apercy's motorcycle, shot by MisterE

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/auto_vespa.png
    caption: Apercy's vespa, shot by MisterE
mesecraft:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/mc_xmas_1.png
    caption: Obsessed with Christmas, shot by Kiopy7

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/mc_xmas_2.png
    caption: Tree, shot by Keihdra
---

November was the 2022 Game jam month; there were some great submissions
this year! Core devs worked on graphics and gamepad support. In late
October, Minetest was used as an urban planning tool to engage students
in their community's planning process.

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [2022 Game Jam](#2022-game-jam)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Education](#education)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)


## Engine News

November saw a lot of bug fixes and performance improvements. Android in
particular saw quite a few fixes to improve stability.

x2048 has continued to work on graphics by implementing
[dynamic exposure](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/12959).
This is a feature that simulates eyes adjusting when going from a well-lit area
into a cave, allowing for high dynamic range (HDR). This builds upon the work to
add post-processing and bloom in 5.7.

v-rob has [submitted](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/12926)
a work-in-progress version of a GUI replacement. Minetest currently uses
formspecs, a custom GUI framework based on Irrlicht GUI. Formspecs are
inflexible, hard to use, and generally an all-round poor experience for users
and developers. The current formspec and HUD APIs will remain to avoid breaking
mods, but the new GUI replacement will supersede these APIs. Replacing formspecs
is a huge undertaking and is still a long way off.

rubenwardy has been working on full gamepad support in Minetest. Currently,
Minetest's gamepad support is very broken - it doesn't work with most hardware.
rubenwardy's [first change](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/12888) was
to rewrite the gamepad code to use better APIs, this will allow any controller
to just work. Next, he started working on using UIs from the gamepad, but this
is a bit harder.


## 2022 Game Jam

November was the month of the 2022 Minetest Game Jam. Participants had 3 weeks
to create a new game using the Minetest engine, to win cash prizes and prestige.
As the second game jam ever, we weren't sure how it would turn out.
Thankfully, it was a roaring success with 15 submissions.

The games were played and rated by 7 judges and the community. The judge scores
were used for the final leaderboard and cash prizes. The community scores
were used to choose a community winner; the most liked game that wasn't in the
top 3 of the judge leaderboard.

Some of the entries were made by judges, and so weren't eligible for prizes.
They're clearly marked in the leaderboard and draw with the nearest non-judge
entry.

Below are the winners. Some games stood out with a high degree of polish and
gameplay. Some stood out by being intriguing and promising, with novel gameplay.
Check out [all the submissions on ContentDB](https://content.luanti.org/packages/?type=game&tag=jam_game_2022).

Thank you to everyone who participated, we had a great time playing your creations!

All prize winners, please do not forget to contact
[GreenXenith](https://forum.luanti.org/memberlist.php?mode=viewprofile&un=GreenXenith)
about your prizes.

### 1st place: Glitch by Wuzzy

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.glitch %}

[Glitch](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Wuzzy/glitch/) is a gem.
At its core, it is a parkour/platformer game, but it's so much
more than that. You play as a bit in a computer system. To strengthen yourself
to help save the system, you have to collect electrons, which are floating
crystals placed throughout the map. The game has a story that the
player is plunged into from the start with an intro and dialog. The endgame
feels like a review of everything you learned in the game, while presenting it
in a fresh and challenging way.

Congrats to [Wuzzy](https://content.luanti.org/users/Wuzzy/) for first place!

### 2nd Place (Judge Entry): Klots by Warr1024

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/klots.png"
    caption="The First Puzzle" %}

As a judge entry, [Klots](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Warr1024/klots/)
was non-competing, and so it shared 2nd place with competitive entries.

Klots is a puzzle game set in space. It skillfully tells a small story without
words: the player begins at the site of a UFO wreck, and finds a portal that
brings them to a spaceship. Klots are colorful blocks which can be pushed
around, and stick to each other. The game involves finding a way to clear each
doorway to the next portal. The HUD and animations are innovative and fun.

Congratulations, [Warr1024](https://content.luanti.org/users/Warr1024/)!

### 2nd Place (Judge Entry), Community Pick: Slidespace by MisterE

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/slidespace.png"
    caption="Slidespace Level 3" %}

[Slidespace](https://content.luanti.org/packages/MisterE/slide_space/) was
another non-competitive judge entry, sharing 2nd place with competitive entries.

Slidespace is a small puzzle game or 3d maze with a simple mechanic: You press
space to slide in one direction until you hit something or fall out of the game.
The puzzles start simple but quickly increase in difficulty. The graphics are
barebones: they let you feel the bleakness and hostility of space.

Congratulations to [MisterE](https://content.luanti.org/users/MisterE/) for
the community pick!

### 2nd Place: Piranesi by Iarbat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/piranesi.png"
    caption="The Piano Room" %}

[Piranesi](https://content.luanti.org/packages/cool_beans/piranesi/) is an
intriguing non-euclidean space puzzle game. It calls to mind old text-adventure
games with its discrete rooms, items to collect, and puzzles to decipher. The
player starts outside an imposing house; the only thing to do is to enter it.
The trouble begins when you walk down the hall: You turn around and find that
the entrance has disappeared. As you wander the shifting halls, read journals
left by other adventurers who have left behind their notes of despair and hope.
Gather clues and items to help you escape.

Piranesi suffered from crashes in the game jam version, but that did not prevent
it from becoming a favorite entry and winning second place for its creative use
of space and an intriguing story and puzzle.

Congratulations, [Iarbat](https://content.luanti.org/packages/cool_beans/piranesi/)!

### 3rd Place: The Secret Story of Spacetravel by Nathan Salapat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/secret_story.png"
    caption="The Medical Bay" %}

In [The Secret Story of Spacetravel](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Nathan.S/sss/), you find yourself trapped in a spaceship on
low power. Reading the ship logs, you discover that the crew abandoned the
vessel but left you a single escape pod. Your goal is to get to the pod, but you
are trapped in the ship's reception hall. The large doors require too much power
to operate, and other doors are locked. Use your super sleuthing skills to find
a way to increase your security clearance onboard the ship, find the powerbox to
power up the large doors, and then make your way to the bridge and to freedom!

The Secret Story of Spacetravel is a solid game of escape room. It has fun
journals left by the crew which tell the story of what happened to the ship, and
nice models and graphics as well. It does suffer from a lack of diversity
in-game mechanics, but for a game jam entry made in three weeks, it does very
well.

Congratulations, [Nathan](https://content.luanti.org/users/Nathan.S/)!


## Mods News

### Automobiles Pack

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.motorcycles %}

[Apercy](https://content.luanti.org/users/apercy/) added a Vespa and a Motorcycle to the [Automobiles Pack](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/automobiles_pck/). Time to hit the
open road!

### Fishing Boat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/fishing_boat.png"
    caption="A strudy fishing boat, screenshot by MisterE" %}

[Apercy](https://content.luanti.org/users/apercy/) also made a new vehicle mod, [Fishing Boat](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/fishing_boat/). Like his Blimp, you can walk
the deck and use the onboard compass. It also has a horn to toot.

### Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension (TA ESPE)

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/TAESPE.png"
    caption="Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension, shot by Debiankaios" %}

[Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension (TA ESPE)](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=28825) is a new mod by [Debiankaios](https://content.luanti.org/packages/?author=debiankaios&q=) extending Techage. It adds Lead, Tungsten
and Urainium, as well as a method of power generation.


### Definition Ripper Mod

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/defripper.jpg"
    caption="Minetest Game and Scifi Nodes ripped using Definition Ripper for his game Klots, shot by Warr1024" %}

[Defripper](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Warr1024/defripper/) is a mod
by [Warr1024](https://content.luanti.org/users/Warr1024/) which was made as
part of the development process of Klots and was publicly released in late
November.

It's a tool for more efficient game development: it grabs community art assets
(node definitions, textures and media) from mods without including problematic
behavior or other game logic in new games. It also helps prune unused assets,
which can shrink download sizes, improve load times and reduce memory usage. It
was used to create the scenery nodes in Klots. See the
[ContentDB description](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Warr1024/defripper/)
for more details.


## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/cover.png"
    caption="An ominous shot of a glowing forest mountain at night. Featuring Nightshade and Japanese Forest biomes from Atlante's excellent Biomes mod as part of the biome modpack Heather has been working on that aims to blend the best of the major biome/foliage mods into a cohesive landscape of wonders. - shot and caption by Heather" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/dragon.png"
    caption="Dragon - By Troodon" %}


## Education

### Urban planning workshop with Minetest

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/urban_planning.png"
    caption="on the left: some of the areas built by participants
on the bottom right: Fabien (director of the urban planning agency) with Julien (in charge of the urban renewal project for the city) and Thomas (one of the workshop organizer/animators) discussing the project - photos and screenshots by Lemente and Thomate" %}

On October 25-27, Lemente and Thomate organized a workshop with Minetest for the
city of Maubeuge in France. Each day, a group of young citizens between 10 and
16 years old shared ideas to improve the public space in their neighborhood, and
then they built these ideas in an in-game map of their city, allowing urban
planners to see what young people wanted for their local area and discuss
current issues with them.

## Server News

### Mesecraft Survival Server #1
<sub>americas.mesecraft.com:30000</sub>

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.mesecraft %}

[Mesecraft](https://www.mesecraft.com/) survival server #1 is now in Christmas mode: the game has an automatic
Christmas seasonal event that [Komodo](https://content.luanti.org/users/MeseCraft/) designed himself. Happy holidays!

### A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/arcade_event.png"
    caption="Join Us for the Arcade Competition, Art by Giov4" %}

👾 THE FIRST A.E.S. Minigames Server ARCADE TOURNAMENT IS HERE! 👾

Feeling nostalgic? Feeling competitive? Well, look no further! Introducing the
new free-for-all AES tournament, right before Christmas ❄️ Come have fun and
play through all the different arcade minigames in our server: see you there!
(ho-ho-ho 🎅)

❓ 20 players, two phases:

1 Direct Elimination on arenas: Bells (20) -> Bowser's (16) -> Circle (12) ->
LostTown (10) -> PetriDish (8)

2 King of the Arcade: the 6 players left compete in all the arcade maps left,
gaining 3 points every time they rank 1st place, 2 points for 2nd place and 1
point for 3rd place. The one with the most points at the end wins.

🗓️ December 22, 2023

🕑 19:30 - 21:30, UTC+0

🏆️ a 2 month statue at the center of the lobby + "Arcade champion" label

✍️ How to apply:

Join either the Minetest - A.E.S. server Matrix room or IRC at irc.freeirc.org
#minigames-discuss and tell us your in-game nick. and that you are applying for
 the tournament. Applications close on Sunday, December 18, or when 20 players
are reached.

Click [here](https://matrix.to/#/#arcadeemulationserver:matrix.org) to join the Matrix space.
Or [here](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.freeirc.org#minigames-discuss) to join irc.

13 spots left, reserve yours!

## In Other News

### YouTube Video Causes Spike in Minetest Traffic

On Saturday 5th, Bobicraft, a Spanish-language Youtube channel with 5M
subscribers, posted [a video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g74i2CwuUp4) about
Minetest. At the time of writing, it has reached 1.3 million views and is now the
most-watched Minetest video, exceeding AntVenom's views.

rubenwardy has written
[a detailed write-up](https://blog.rubenwardy.com/2022/12/08/contentdb-youtuber-finds-minetest/)
of the event, including stats, based on data from ContentDB.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/nov5_traffic_spike.png"
    caption="ContentDB downloads graphic" %}

### Advanced Trains Content Git Organization

One problem with advanced trains is that it can be hard to collect all the
content for it. To help with that,  W3RQ01, Blockhead and Orwell96 have made a
git organization to collect all the Advanced Trains content in one place, as
well as keep some stale adv_trains mods up-to-date.

The collection can be found [here](https://notabug.org/advtrains_supplemental).

### Blog Updates

We are switching the name of the blog to "Last Month In Minetest" instead of
"This Month..." because it better fits what we actually do.

We did not have a post last month for a few reasons. First, I
(MisterE) was feeling a bit burned out as I tackle school and other aspects of
life.

Secondly, there was little or no content submitted on the GitHub issue
tracker. The content submission process (involving making issues on the blog
issue tracker for news) makes the editors' jobs easy, which means the blog
creation process is easier and that proper attribution is easier as well.

Additionally, we could use more editors. Currently, the only active editors are
rubenwardy, who collects the engine news and checks format and usage, and
myself. More editors would mean more diverse content and more reliable content.
If you are interested, please contact rubenwardy.

Also, a big thank you to the contributors who used the issue tracker this month!
You really helped improve the post!

See you next month; Merry Christmas!
