---
layout: post
title: "November - Last Month in Minetest (09)"
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - Rubenwardy
  - Apercy
  - Komodo
  - Zughy
  - Giov4
  - Heather
  - Lemente
  - Thomate
  - Troodon
  - Keihdra
  - Kiopy7
  - Debiankaios
  - W3RQ01
  - y5nw
description: >
  REPLACE - description
image: /static/blog/2022_September/castleprop.jpg
forum_topic: https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28773
tags:
  - this_month
glitch:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_1.png
    caption: Part of the intro

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_2.png
    caption: The Hub
motorcycles:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/auto_cycle.png
    caption: Apercy's motorcycle, Shot by MisterE

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/auto_vespa.png
    caption: Apercy's vespa, Shot by MisterE
mesecraft:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/mc_xmas_1.png
    caption: Obsessed with Christmas, Shot by Kiopy7

  - src: /static/blog/2022_November/mc_xmas_2.png
    caption: Tree, Shot by Keihdra
---

REPLACE - description

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Education](#education)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)


## Engine News

## Games News

November was the month of the 2022 Minetest Game Jam. As the second game jam
ever, we were not sure how it would turn out. Thankfully, it was a roaring
success with 15 submissions. A few games are really fun and finished, and others
are intriguing and promising. The full list of submissions is [here](https://content.minetest.net/packages/?type=game&page=1&tag=jam_game_2022). Thank
you to everyone who participated, we had a great time playing your creations!
Here are the winners. Other games, as they are finished or become
feature-complete, may be featured in future posts.

### 1st Place winner - Glitch by Wuzzy

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.glitch %}

[Glitch](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Wuzzy/glitch/) is a gem. At its core, it is a parkour/platformer game, but its so much
more than that. You play as a bit in a computer system. To strengthen yourself
to help save the system, you have to collect electrons, which are floating
crystals that are well-placed throughout the map. The game has a story that the
player is plunged into from the start with an intro and with dialogues and which
permeates the entire experience right up to the endgame sequence. The endgame
feels like a review of everything you learned in the game, while presenting it
in a fresh and challenging way. 

Congrats to [Wuzzy](https://content.minetest.net/users/Wuzzy/) for first place!

### 2nd Place (Judge Entry) - Klots by Warr1024

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/klots.png"
    caption="The First Puzzle" %}

As a judge entry, [Klots](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Warr1024/klots/) was non-competing, and so it shared 2nd place with
competitive entries. Klots is a puzzle game set in space. It skillfully tells a
small story without words: the player begins at the site of a UFO wreck, and
finds a portal that brings them to a spaceship. Klots are colorful blocks which
can be pushed around, and stick to each other. The game involves finding a way
to clear each doorway to the next portal. The HUD and animations are innovative
and fun. 

Congratulations, [Warr1024](https://content.minetest.net/users/Warr1024/)!

### 2nd Place (Judge Entry), Community Pick - Slidespace by MisterE

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/slidespace.png"
    caption="Slidespace Level 3" %}

[Slidespace](https://content.minetest.net/packages/MisterE/slide_space/) was [my](https://content.minetest.net/users/MisterE/) entry to the game jam. As a judge, my game was also
non-competitive and shares second place with competitive entries. Slidespace is
a small puzzle game or 3d maze with a simple mechanic: You press space to slide
in one direction until you hit something or fall out of the game. The puzzles
start simple but quickly increase in difficulty. The graphics are barebones:
they let you feel the bleakness and hostility of space. 

Thank you for the Community Pick, glad you liked it!

### 2nd Place winner - Piranesi by Iarbat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/piranesi.png"
    caption="The Piano Room" %}

[Piranesi](https://content.minetest.net/packages/cool_beans/piranesi/) is an intriguing non-euclidean space puzzle game. It calls to mind old
text-adventure games with its discrete rooms, items to collect, and puzzles to
decipher. The player starts outside an imposing house; the only thing to do is
to enter it. The trouble begins when you walk down the hall: You turn around
and find that the entrance has disappeared. As you wander the shifting halls,
read journals left by other adventurers who have left behind their notes of
despair and hope. Gather clues and items to help you escape.

Piranesi suffered from crashes in the game jam version, but that did not prevent
it from becoming a favorite entry and winning second place for its creative use
of space and an intriguing story and puzzle. 

Congradulations, [Iarbat](https://content.minetest.net/packages/cool_beans/piranesi/)!

### 3rd Place winner - The Secret Story of Spacetravel by Nathan Salapat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/secret_story.png"
    caption="The Medical Bay" %}

In [The Secret Story of Spacetravel](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Nathan.S/sss/), you find yourself trapped in a spaceship on
low power. Reading the ship logs, you discover that the crew abandoned the
vessel but left you a single escape pod. Your goal is to get to the pod, but you
are trapped in the ship's reception hall. The large doors require too much power
to operate, and other doors are locked. Use your super sleuthing skills to find
a way to increase your security clearance onboard the ship, find the powerbox to
power up the large doors, and then make your way to the bridge and to freedom!

The Secret Story of Spacetravel is a solid game of escape room. It has fun
journals left by the crew which tell the story of what happened to the ship, and
nice models and graphics as well. It does suffer from a lack of diversity
in-game mechanics, but for a game jam entry made in three weeks, it does very
well.

Congradulations, [Nathan](https://content.minetest.net/users/Nathan.S/)!

### Prizes
All prize winners, please do not forget to contact [GreenXenith](https://forum.minetest.net/memberlist.php?mode=viewprofile&un=GreenXenith) about your prizes.

## Mods News

### Automobiles Pack

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.motorcycles %}

[Apercy](https://content.minetest.net/users/apercy/) added a Vespa and a Motorcycle to the [Automobiles Pack](https://content.minetest.net/packages/apercy/automobiles_pck/). Time to hit the
open road!

### Fishing Boat

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/fishing_boat.png"
    caption="A strudy fishing boat, screenshot by MisterE" %}

[Apercy](https://content.minetest.net/users/apercy/) also made a new vehicle mod, [Fishing Boat](https://content.minetest.net/packages/apercy/fishing_boat/). Like his Blimp, you can walk
the deck and use the onboard compass. It also has a horn to toot.

### Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension (TA ESPE)

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/TAESPE.png"
    caption="Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension, Shot by Debiankaios" %}

[Techage Energy, Storage and Product Extension (TA ESPE)](https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=28825) is a new mod by [Debiankaios](https://content.minetest.net/packages/?author=debiankaios&q=) extending Techage. It adds Lead, Tungsten
and Urainium, as well as a method of power generation.



## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/cover.png"
    caption="An ominous shot of a glowing forest mountain at night. Featuring Nightshade and Japanese Forest biomes from Atlante's excellent Biomes mod as part of the biome modpack Heather has been working on that aims to blend the best of the major biome/foliage mods into a cohesive landscape of wonders. - Shot and caption by Heather" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/dragon.png"
    caption="Dragon - By Troodon" %}

## Education

### Urban planning workshop with Minetest

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/urban_planning.png"
    caption="on the left: some of the areas built by participants
on the bottom right: Fabien (director of the urban planning agency) with Julien (in charge of the urban renewal project for the city) and Thomas (one of the workshop organizer/animators) discussing the project - photos and screenshots by Lemente and Thomate" %}

On October 25-27, Lemente and Thomate organized a workshop with Minetest for the
city of Maubeuge in France. Each day, a group of young citizens between 10 and
16 years old shared ideas to improve the public space in their neighborhood, and
then they built these ideas in an in-game map of their city, allowing urban
planners to see what young people wanted for their local area and discuss
current issues with them.

## Server News

### Mesecraft Survival Server #1
<sub>americas.mesecraft.com:30000</sub>

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.mesecraft %}

[Mesecraft](https://www.mesecraft.com/) survival server #1 is now in Christmas mode: the game has an automatic
Christmas seasonal event that [Komodo](https://content.minetest.net/users/MeseCraft/) designed himself. Happy holidays!

### A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_November/arcade_event.png"
    caption="Join Us for the Arcade Competition, Art by Giov4" %}

👾 THE FIRST A.E.S. Minigames Server ARCADE TOURNAMENT IS HERE! 👾

Feeling nostalgic? Feeling competitive? Well, look no further! Introducing the
new free-for-all AES tournament, right before Christmas ❄️ Come have fun and
play through all the different arcade minigames in our server: see you there!
(ho-ho-ho 🎅)

❓ 20 players, two phases:

1 Direct Elimination on arenas: Bells (20) -> Bowser's (16) -> Circle (12) ->
LostTown (10) -> PetriDish (8)

2 King of the Arcade: the 6 players left compete in all the arcade maps left,
gaining 3 points every time they rank 1st place, 2 points for 2nd place and 1
point for 3rd place. The one with the most points at the end wins.

🗓️ December 22, 2023

🕑 19:30 - 21:30, UTC+0

🏆️ a 2 month statue at the center of the lobby + "Arcade champion" label

✍️ How to apply:

Join either the Minetest - A.E.S. server Matrix room or IRC at irc.freeirc.org
#minigames-discuss and tell us your in-game nick. and that you are applying for
 the tournament. Applications close on Sunday, December 18, or when 20 players
are reached.

Click [here](https://matrix.to/#/#arcadeemulationserver:matrix.org) to join the Matrix space.
Or [here](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.freeirc.org#minigames-discuss) to join irc.

13 spots left, reserve yours!

## In Other News

### Advanced Trains Content Git Organization
One problem with advanced trains is that it can be hard to collect all the content for it. To help with that,  W3RQ01, Blockhead and Orwell96 have made a git organization to collect all the Advanced Trains content in one place, as well as keep some stale adv_trains mods up-to-date. 

The collection can be found [here](https://notabug.org/advtrains_supplemental).

### Blog Content

We are switching the name of the blog to "Last Month In Minetest" instead of
"This Month..." because it better fits what we actually do.

We did not have a post last month, which was for a couple of reasons. First, I
(MisterE) was feeling a bit burned out as I tackle school and other aspects of
life. Secondly, there was little or no content submitted on the GitHub issue
tracker. The content submission process (involving making issues on the blog
issue tracker for news) makes the editors' jobs easy, which means the blog
creation process is easier and that proper attribution is easier as well.
Additionally, we could use more editors. Currently, the only active editors are
Rubenwardy, who collects the engine news and checks format and usage, and
myself. More editors would mean more diverse content and more reliable content.
If you are interested, please contact Rubenwardy.

Also, A big Thank You to the contributors who used the issue tracker this month!
You really helped improve the post!

See you next month; Merry Christmas!

