---
layout: post
title:  "June - This Month in Minetest (05)"
authors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - NathanS
  - ExeVirus
  - kilbith
description: >
  This month, rubenwardy has been working on a settings redesign, and x2048 has
  been working on adding post-processing to Minetest. Traitor has received two
  long-requested features, and Exile was updated with giant rings as well as
  gameplay features. Additionally, the Minetest Modding Book has a new chapter
  available on mods/games translation support.
image: /static/blog/2022_June/exile_rings.png
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28380
tags:
  - last_month
---

This month, rubenwardy has been working on a settings redesign, and x2048 has
been working on adding post-processing to Minetest. Traitor has received two
long-requested features, and Exile was updated with giant rings as well as
gameplay features. Additionally, the Minetest Modding Book has a new chapter
available on mods/games translation support.

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News ](#engine-news-)
- [Work-in-progress Changes](#work-in-progress-changes)
- [Game News ](#game-news-)
- [Mod News ](#mod-news-)
- [Art and Builds ](#art-and-builds-)
- [Server News ](#server-news-)
- [In Other News ](#in-other-news-)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### Last Month's Development

June saw 46 commits to master, 38 PRs merged, and 92 issues closed.

Continuing with User Experience improvements, rubenwardy has been working on a
settings redesign. The intention is to make settings more discoverable and
easier to change. Zughy provided the new icons, and along with Giova, the
settings structure.

This is the start of the mainmenu redesign project. The styling matches the
current mainmenu style, but it will change when the mainmenu redesign is worked
on.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_June/settings_redesign.png" caption="Settings redesign" %}

### Upcoming Development

rubenwardy plans to continue working on the settings redesign. It needs to go
through a review, and then the next step is to only show settings if they are
relevant. For example, shader settings should only be visible when shaders are
enabled, and Android settings should only be on Android.

Work on the rest of the mainmenu redesign is likely to start at some point in
the next few months.

x2048 has been working on adding post-processing to Minetest. This is part
of the graphics modernization project and will result in improved performance
for tone mapping. It will also allow new effects including depth of field, bloom,
and color filters to be implemented.

Minetest 5.6.0 is currently planned for July. Releases are preceded by a
feature freeze, a time where only bug fixes and maintenance changes
are allowed. Freezes last for at least one week and are extended if there are
remaining issues.

## Work-in-progress Changes

kilbith has been working on an experimental change that adds camera control.
There is currently one camera per player in Minetest. This Camera API allows
more (static) cameras in the game at different places. They can be used for
cutscenes, screen casting onto an entity (HL² Dr Breen speech-like), security
cameras, vehicle's rear views, and more.


## Game News <a name="games"></a>

### Traitor

[Traitor](https://notabug.org/NathanS21/Traitor) is a game by NathanS
inspired by Among Us. It's recently received two long-requested features, vents
and level sabotage.

The vents have been adapted from Joe7575’s hyperloop mod and allow traitors and
ghosts to instantly travel between vents, providing that the level builder chose
to include them. This feature has been requested for over a year.

Level sabotage, while a work-in-progress, is now available. Currently,
there is only one node that can be sabotaged by the traitor: the switch. Level
designers can choose how long the players have to repair the sabotaged node, and
whether repairing or failing to repair the node should result in the match
ending.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_June/traitor1.png" caption="The New Vents" %}

### Exile

[Exile](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Mantar/exile/) is a challenging
survival game for Minetest.

Exile's tech tree has been rebalanced to provide for multiple paths. A new
mapgen feature has been added that spawns giant rings on the surface, probably
left by the Ancients. You can now throw spears for hunting and fighting. Canoes
and airboats have been improved for performance. Tree trunks and some other
things are more fire-resistant now. Fish farming is now possible with an update
to the Gundu fish's behavior, and finally, the Spanish translation of the game
has been completed.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_June/exile_rings.png" caption="Giant Rings Rise from the Sea" %}

## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>
### Colour Jump

[MrFreeman's](https://content.luanti.org/users/MrFreeman/) first mod is a
minigame called
[Colour Jump](https://content.luanti.org/packages/MrFreeman/colour_jump/).
It's all about jumping on the correct platform before you get eliminated.

### pilzmod

[Phii](https://content.luanti.org/users/Phii/) has released
["pilzmod"](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Phii/pilzmod/), an interesting
new biome mod. It adds an unnatural mushroom biome that must be spawned to
appear. After that, it grows on its own accord, and can only be contained by
defeating the boss that will spawn in it.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_June/pilz.png" caption="The Monsters that Come" %}

## Art and Builds <a name="art"></a>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_June/sb66.jpg" caption="SB66's Lovely castle on a hill" %}


## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

### From In our Midst:
<sub>play.nathansalapat.com:30000</sub>

Traitor is running on the 'In Our Midst' server, where there is currently work
being done on an academy that further explains game mechanics for players and
builders. The Vents update featured above is already implemented in some arenas;
grab a few friends and check it out!

### From A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

The winner of the last Blockleague tournament was team Horizon. Congrats to the
winners; stay tuned for the next tournament!

## In Other News <a name="o-news"></a>

### New Modding Book Chapter

The [Minetest Modding Book](https://rubenwardy.com/minetest_modding_book/) has a
new chapter available
[about mods/games translation support](https://rubenwardy.com/minetest_modding_book/en/quality/translations.html).
The modding book is a great way to learn how to write mods and games for
Minetest.

### AI Modder

rubenwardy wrote a
[blog article about an AI that can write Minetest
mods](https://blog.rubenwardy.com/2022/06/22/gpt-3-minetest-modding/).
It's an exploration of GPT-3/Codex/GitHub Copilot&#39;s knowledge of Minetest
modding, with node registration, formspec manipulation, mod creation, and
Minecraft to Minetest mod conversion
