---
layout: post
title: "Minetest 5.6.0 released!"
author: rubenwardy
contributors: ["Ronoaldo"]
description: >-
  Minetest 5.6.0 has been released, with dynamic shadows, improvements to
  Select Mods and login/register UIs, and more!
image: /static/blog/5.6.0/cover.jpg
forum_topic: https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28511
tags:
  - release
dynamic_shadows:
  - src: /static/blog/5.6.0/shadow_1.jpg
  - src: /static/blog/5.6.0/shadow_2.jpg
split_login_register:
  - src: /static/blog/5.6.0/login_register.png
    caption: Split login and register

  - src: /static/blog/2022_April/split_login_register_2.png
    caption: New register dialog, replacing the confirmation dialog
---

Minetest 5.6.0 has been released, with dynamic shadows, improvements to
Select Mods and login/register UIs, and more!

Last year, we decided on a
[roadmap](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/master/doc/direction.md) of
goals to focus on. This release has made good progress to these goals, especially
with graphics and user interfaces.

You can download Minetest from
[our website](https://www.minetest.net/downloads/).
There's also the
[the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.5.0_.E2.86.92_5.6.0).

<!-- more -->

- [Graphics](#graphics)
  - [Irrlicht-MT](#irrlicht-mt)
  - [Dynamic Shadows](#dynamic-shadows)
  - [Fixed Transparency Sorting](#fixed-transparency-sorting)
- [Mod Configuration ("Select Mods")](#mod-configuration-select-mods)
- [Improved login/register UI](#improved-loginregister-ui)
- [Scripting API](#scripting-api)
- [Read more](#read-more)


## Graphics

### Irrlicht-MT

A big focus in 5.6.0 was improvements to our graphics and input code. Minetest
uses an 3d rendering library called Irrlicht. Irrlicht is quite dated and is no
longer being updated, so in 5.5.0 we created a fork called Irrlicht-MT. This has
allowed us to fix many bugs that weren't fixable before. We have also been
removing unused code and replacing what we can with other libraries. Our end
goal is to completely remove Irrlicht and use SDL and OpenGL directly.

### Dynamic Shadows

Minetest also now supports dynamic shadows based on the sun and moon position.
Nodes, players, and entities will all cast shadows, and shadows can be colored
by semi-transparent things like water and glass. Work for this feature was
actually started in 5.5.0, but didn't make that release due to various issues.

In order to enable dynamic shadows, a mod or game must opt-in to it. You can use
the [Enable Shadows](https://content.minetest.net/packages/ROllerozxa/enable_shadows/)
mod to enable shadows in any game.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.dynamic_shadows %}

### Fixed Transparency Sorting

One major change was adding proper transparency sorting, this has fixed many
glitches related to viewing transparent materials through other transparent
materials, such as liquids, glass, and leaves.


## Mod Configuration ("Select Mods")

It's now possible to install the same mod to multiple places, and then select
a specific instance to enable. Ending up with the same mod installed multiple
times is common because mod packs often contain mods found elsewhere.

The Select Mods dialog has been updated to show helpful information when
there are missing dependencies. The user interface also now shows human-readable
titles rather than the technical name.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/mod_config.png" caption="Dependency errors in the Select Mods dialog" %}


## Improved login/register UI

Minetest's per-server login system is something that was confusing to new
players - we frequently got questions about how to create accounts.

The confirm password/registration dialog has been removed. There are now
separate buttons for Register and Login, and a new register dialog. This should
help make things clearer to new users.


{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.split_login_register %}


## Scripting API

Minetest now has an API that lets mods run Lua code in another thread. This can
be used to offload expensive calculations, unblocking the main server thread.

It's now possible for games and mods to hide the position and other information
in the debug (F5) display.

`name` in `game.conf` is now deprecated, `title` should be used instead. This is
improve consistency with `mod.conf`, which uses `title` for human-readable
names.

Loading a world using mods with missing dependencies currently automatically
disables those mods. This is now deprecated, and worlds will instead fail to
load in the future. This is to improve user experience, as players are often
confused by the mods disabling itselves.

The particle spawner API has seen a lot of improvement, adding more features to
control animations.

## Read more

Read [the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.5.0_.E2.86.92_5.6.0).

Downloads:

- [Windows (64-bit)](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.6.0/minetest-5.6.0-win64.zip)
- [Windows (32-bit)](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.6.0/minetest-5.6.0-win32.zip)
- [macOS](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.6.0/minetest-5.6.0-osx.zip)

Cover image is by Ronoaldo, and features 5.6's shadows with
[Nice Textures (texture pack)](https://content.minetest.net/packages/duckgo/nice_textures/)
and
[Ethereal NG (mod)](https://content.minetest.net/packages/TenPlus1/ethereal/).
