---
layout: post
title:  "April - This Month in Minetest (03)"
authors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - Warr1024
  - dew
  - Ineva
description: >
  This month, engine development picks up with regular meetings,
  NodeCore gets a 24/7 livestream, and the Minetest Blog is now official!
image: /static/blog/2022_April/plane_header.png
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28105
tags:
  - last_month
split_login_register:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_April/split_login_register_1.png
    caption: Split login and register

  - src: /static/blog/2022_April/split_login_register_2.png
    caption: New register dialog, replacing the confirmation dialog
---

This month, engine development picks up with regular meetings,
NodeCore gets a 24/7 livestream, and the Minetest Blog is now official!

<!-- more -->

*  [Engine](#engine)
*  [Games](#games)
*  [Mods](#mods)
*  [Art/Builds](#art)
*  [Server News](#s-news)
*  [In Other News](#o-news)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### Regular Meetings and Triagers

Engine development has suffered from too many issues and Pull Requests compared
to available developer hours for a long time. At the start of April, the engine
had over 130 Pull Requests (PRs) and 1.1k issues. In order to resolve this, and
to speed up development, Minetest developers have started fortnightly meetings.

Core dev meetings provide a time when multiple core developers are around to
discuss issues, changes, and the development direction. As Minetest is an
open-source project, it's important that the development is done publicly and
transparently. Meetings take place on
[Internet Relay Chat](https://wiki.minetest.net/IRC) (IRC) and are publicly
logged, allowing anyone to watch or participate. Meetings follow a plan arranged
prior to the meeting;
[meeting plans and notes](https://dev.minetest.net/Meetings) can be found on the
dev wiki.

Another organisational change is that Zughy has joined the team as a triager,
labelling and managing issues. The triager system was introduced a couple of
years ago but was never actively used. Zughy has already made huge progress in
organising older issues, and we're likely to be adding more triagers soon.

### Last Month's Development

April saw 30 PRs merged and 75 issues closed.

Development largely consisted of bug fixes, minor features, and continued
improvements to the graphics pipeline. One major change was adding proper
transparency sorting, this has fixed many glitches related to viewing
transparent materials through other transparent materials, such as liquids,
glass, and leaves.

### Upcoming Development

Work is continuing on improving Minetest's User Experience (UX).

New users are often confused about how to sign up for new servers. In 5.1.0, a
"confirm password" dialog was added in an attempt to make new account creation
more straightforward; however, this change was ineffective. Users were still
confused by account creation, and the dialog did not abate that.

To resolve these problems, core developers have decided to change the UX to
include separate register and login buttons. You can still log into a server as
before, but a new register button will take you to a new dialog. Pro users need
not worry; there's a setting to return to the previous behaviour.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.split_login_register %}

Another feature currently under review is sfan5's
[async modding API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/11131). This will
allow mods to run code on multiple threads, speeding up calculation-heavy tasks
like precalculating mapgen or [Advanced Trains](https://content.luanti.org/packages/orwell/advtrains/)
train routes. There are caveats: writing async code is harder than writing sync code,
and the async API cannot access most data including the map and players.
It's mostly for offloading calculations from the main thread.


## Game News <a name="games"></a>

### Repixture 2.0

Wuzzy has released [Repixture 2.0](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Wuzzy/repixture/).
There's no player-facing changes, but there's been a lot of work to
redesign the structure of the game to reduce technical debt and help future
development.

### RealMoon Beta

[Realmoon](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?p=409785#p409785), a lunar
survival game, has received an update, bringing some changes to geology,
minerals, and crafts.


## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>

### Perlin Explorer

Wuzzy has released
[Perlin Explorer](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Wuzzy/perlin_explorer/),
a mod that allows you to test and experiment with Perlin noises. This is
especially useful for game and mod developers who want to fine-tune the noises
in an efficient manner. It's also helpful for discovering useful noise parameters
for the various mapgen settings in Minetest.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/perlin_explorer.png" caption="Perlin Explorer's dialog" %}

### Mesecons becomes game-independent

Mesecons is one of Minetest's most popular mods, but until now has been entirely
dependent on Minetest Game. TurkeyMcMac is
[making mesecons independent from MTG](https://github.com/minetest-mods/mesecons/pull/607),
which means that you'll be able to play it with more games soon.

### Balloon Bop

Theres a new Arena_lib minigame: Balloon Bop! It's on
[ContentDB](https://content.luanti.org/packages/MisterE/balloon_bop/) and on
A.E.S minigames. Bop balloons into spikes to pop'em and rack up points! Based on
ExeVirus's Ludum Dare game
[Balloon Bash](https://ldjam.com/events/ludum-dare/50/balloon-bash).

### Beduino

[Joe7575](https://content.luanti.org/users/joe7575/) has just released
[Beduino](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=28101&p=410063#p410063),
a CPU/computer simulation (virtual machine) with a programming environment.
It's based on the older mod
[VM16](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=27822), and features
C-like and ASM languages to program in-game with.

Heres an intro video:

{% include youtube.html id="Dbn19YcltTk" %}

### PA28 Plane

Another plane has rolled onto the tarmac from
[Apercy's](https://content.luanti.org/users/apercy/) hanger. The
[PA28](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/pa28/) is a small passenger
plane that can fit up to 4 passengers. Like all the other planes, it is
paintable too!

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/PA28.jpg" caption="The PA28" %}

### Studs

Lego fans may be interested in erlehmann's
[Studs](https://content.luanti.org/packages/erlehmann/studs/), which turns all
non-natural blocks into lego blocks!
But be aware, this may reduce performance - at least until 5.6.0.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/studs.png" caption="Lego, anyone?" %}

### SkyGen

the_raven_262 posted a new mod for customizing skys based on biomes. [SkyGen](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=9&t=27982) lets
you define sky colors per-biome, while it automatically handles the size of
celestial bodies and cloud properties based on the heat and humidity of the
biome. It comes with support for Minetest Game's biomes, but more biomes are
easy to add.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/skygen.png" caption="Northern Sunset" %}


## Art and Builds <a name="art"></a>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/dragon_statue.png" caption="Fire and Water" %}

A ruinous, apocalyptic spawn building in close contact with nature and with a
hint of draconic mythology; quite fitting for the server, “The Last Survivors”.
It exudes the toughness that players will embody as they build society from the
ground up.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/warehouse.jpg" caption="'Warehouse', by SB66" %}


## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

### From YourLand: Easter is Almost Over

<sub>your-land.de:30000</sub>

The Easter event is almost over!

Soon, we will end the Easter Event and return spawn to its old glory. You can
use the the last week to try your luck in the labyrinth.

Our next major event will be the monthly birthday celebration, for all those who
have a birthday in May. It takes place on May 28th; more details will be
announced on [Discord](https://discord.gg/BWbxfCpuZ5).

### From NodeCore Community: Automatic Livestream
<sub>nodecore.mine.nu:30000</sub>

Warr1024 has created a 24/7 [livestream](https://www.twitch.tv/NodeCoreMT)
of his NodeCore server. The livestream
is entirely automated, choosing camera angles and players to focus on.

{% include video.html src="/static/blog/2022_April/stream-demo.mp4" format="video/mp4" caption="A preview of the livestream" %}

[NodeCore](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Warr1024/nodecore/)
is a game about emergent behaviour and exploration:

> A surreal dream-world where everything is possible but nothing is easy.
> Peaceful and Zen. Brutally obstinate. Prepare to unlearn everything you
> thought you knew about voxel sandbox games.

The livestreaming software consists of
[Docker services](https://gitlab.com/sztest/minetestcast) to run and stream
Minetest, and a
[server-side mod](https://gitlab.com/sztest/szutilpack/-/tree/master/szutil_cinecam)
to control the camera. The mod chooses an angle to look at the player, and
assesses whether it is viable based on distance and line-of-sight.

### From Minigames Galore and A.E.S. Minigames:
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

A.E.S. Minigames and Minigames Galore! are teaming up. Minigames Galore will
shut down, and move all our minigames onto A.E.S. This will hopefully mean more
people online to play minigames, as well as a central minigame community. We are
also interested in getting someone to organize events for A.E.S. If that sounds
like your cup of tea, join our [matrix
room](https://matrix.to/#/#minetest-aes:matrix.org) and chat with Zughy and
MisterE.


## In Other News <a name="o-news"></a>

The Minetest Blog is now official! It has also received a redesign, thanks
to rubenwardy.

Sorry that this post is a week late; we try to keep an approximately monthly
schedule but sometimes life happens :)

Edit 2022-05-09: updated Repixture description, fixed some typos.
