---
layout: post
title:  "July - This Month in Minetest (06)"
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - rubenwardy
  - chrbinder
  - Lemente
  - komodo
  - Srjskam
  - Thunder1035
  - Hume2
  - x2048
  - Apercy
  - Franzopow
  - Arekusei


description: >
  Description here
  more description
image: /static/blog/2022_June/exile_rings.png
forum_topic: 
tags:
  - this_month
exploreandlearnscreenshots:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_July/LMZworkshop1.png
    caption: Workshop screenshots by chbinder

  - src: /static/blog/2022_July/LMZworkshop2.png
    caption: Workshop screenshots by chbinder
---

This month, after the 5.6 release which introduced shadows and particle improvements, attention turns to 5.7 development. It is shaping up to be a big release, introducing many new graphics features. Also, there are important updates for Exile and Mesecraft, as well as a few new interesting mods. Finally, Minetest was this past month at exploreandlearn@LMZ, and edutech workshop in Germany.

<!-- more -->

*  [Engine](#engine)
*  [Games](#games)
*  [Mods](#mods)
*  [Art/Builds](#art)
*  [Education](#edu)
*  [Server News](#s-news)
*  [In Other News](#o-news)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### 5.6.0 release
Minetest 5.6.0 was released on August 4th. Read all about it in [the dedicated blog post](https://blog.minetest.net/2022/08/04/5.6.0-released/).

### Animated Particlespawners
Starting with Minetest 5.6, modders have much greater control over particle spawners. Here are just two neat things you can do with them now (notice the particles over fire and torches):

{% include youtube.html id="z1PERXV3adw" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/coloredtorches.png" caption="[Fake colored torches](https://github.com/x2048/colored_torches) using particle spawners with the new api. See the test mod here" %}

### New graphics pipeline, New shaders
x2048 has been continuing on implementing a new post-processing framework, as well as many new shaders that use it. He has made WIP shaders for volumetric lighting, depth of field and bloom so far. 

*** NEED GOOD SCREENSHOTS



## Game News <a name="games"></a>

### Exile

Many, many bugs were fixed in Exile in the point release, including a crash on 5.6 and rainwater filling pots while the player is away. Also, shadows were enabled to support Minetest 5.6's new feature.

### Mesecraft

Apercy's helicopters were added to the game, with minor modifications. They now require oil (from deep underground) to use as fuel, and they can carry a passenger. Helicopters were a much-missed feature, and now they are back! Also, Mesecraft was put on Content Database, making it easy to install from in-game.

## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>

###  Wilhelmines Natural Biomes 

Liil made a new biomes mod that adds many well-designed biomes to the game. Included are: Wet Savanna, Outback, Alder Swamp, Alpine, Beach, Bamboo Forest and Mediterranean biomes.


{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/Outback2.png" caption="Liil's Outback Biome" %}

### Tides

Lemente has been working on a fork of the [Tides mod by smeagolthellama](https://github.com/Lemente/tides), rewriting most of it, and developing more features.

Lemente split the sea into multiple types of nodes which minimizes the number of active ABMs instead of having all ocean nodes run the same ABM. He also spread the ABM load by making the tides spread in waves. The mod also permits water to be raised above the original sea level, for some dramatic floodings. Other features are planned. Contributers are welcome!

You can try out the WIP mod [here](https://github.com/Lemente/TidesAndFloods)

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/lemente_tides.mp4" caption="Tides rasing the water level in a river valley" %}


### Worm Farm
The [Worm Farm](https://content.minetest.net/packages/sirrobzeroone/worm_farm/) mod by [sirrobzeroone](https://content.minetest.net/users/sirrobzeroone/) lets you farm worms for the ethereal mod's fishing feature without digging up a lot of dirt.

### Steampunk Blimp
You may remember Apercy's Steampunk blimp from last month... well, now he has added a compass feature as well as the ability to paint the blimp while onboard.

## Art/Builds <a name="art"></a>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/ship.png" caption="Island Cruise by Srjskam" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/modernhouse.png" caption="Modern House by Thunder1035" %}

## Education <a name="edu"></a>

Minetest was featured at [exploreandlearn@LMZ](https://www.lmz-bw.de/veranstaltungen/exploreandlearnlmz/) ([translation here](https://www-lmz--bw-de.translate.goog/veranstaltungen/exploreandlearnlmz/?_x_tr_sl=auto&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp)), a German online Educator Instruction event from July 3rd to July 6th. Teachers and others interested in education could participate in workshops and presentations from the three categories ‘playandlearn’, ‘buildandlearn’, and ‘codeandlearn’, each using minetest to reinforce educational goals. 

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/exploreandlearnlogo.jpg" caption="exploreandlearn@LMZ logo" %}

On Tuesday, July 5, there was a one-day workshop concerned with future-oriented learning and how to develop learning scenarios for educational contexts. The workshop was held by Chris Binder and Tammo Engelhard, who are both freelance trainers for the Landesmedienzentrum Baden-Württemberg, Germany (LMZ BW). In the workshop, teachers were introduced to Minetest and its potentials for learning. Starting from some gameplay examples, the participants developed learning scenarios in small groups and later on, built prototypes of their ideas.

On Thursday, July 7, two shorter workshops were held to introduce a map template that can be used by teachers in conjunction with the BLOCKALOT web dashboard for Minetest servers.
The swampy landscape offers different points of interest that each pose their own challenges to the learners. These POI can be modified by teachers to cater to their curricula or intended learning outcomes. However, it is crucial that learners remain active and not just passive recipients of knowledge. One point of interest is an area with floating islands and an old house that needs to be renovated with sustainability in mind.
Then, the learners choose sustainable development goals themselves and build the settlement according to their own plans. The whole group can discuss and evaluate the results after the building phase.
The players are provided with useful materials in a cave, where they may also write ideas about sustainable building on the walls.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.exploreandlearnscreenshots %}


## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

### A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

The time has come to announce the next Block League tournament!

Friday, September 9 from 19:30 - 21:30, UTC+0

Prepare yourself: if you think you're good enough, you're not.
This time, instead of playing the entire tournament on Station 2, we'll play the quarterfinals on Hyperium map, meaning more training, sweat and tears. Are you up for the challenge?
There will be 8 teams of 3 players each. The contest format is direct elimination.
The tournament will be held on the Hyperium and Station 2 maps.

How to apply:

Join either the [#minetest-aes:matrix.org Matrix room](https://matrix.to/#/#minetest-aes:matrix.org) or on IRC at [irc.freeirc.org #minigames-discuss](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.freeirc.org#minigames-discuss). Tell us who your team is or look for people to team up with there.

Applications close on Wednesday, August 31 or when 8 teams are reached.

### Tunnelers' Abyss
<sub>37.46.208.34:30000</sub>

On 29th June 2022, the extension of the express line R2 on Tunnelers' Abyss was opened. It was elongated by 7.4 km, reaching its total length 15 km. This makes the line R2 the longest train line in Tunnelers' Abyss. It leads from Will Beach via Spawn and File not Found to Docker and reaches the maximum speed 160 km/h. The prior record was held by the line S1 with its length 13.1 km, spanning from Southern Cliff to Fort Harko.

While building this extension, it was necessary to cope with several challenges. The track passes over Fourier Mountains and Trolly Hills. The slope from File not Found, the previous endpoint of R2, up to Noot Noot is quite flat. However, the slope from Noot Noot down to Densevlad is very steep and therefore it was necessary to choose a longer curvy trajectory. The maximal speed there drops to 90 km/h. Trolly Hills are not higher than Fourier Mountains but they are very jaggy at some places. Therefore, it was necessary to dig there two tunnels. On the other hand, the Legendrian Basin is quite flat and building the track was a pleasure there. The track ends at the Docker station, which is both a train station and a harbour.

### Panqkart
<sub>panqkart.minetest.land:30001</sub>

Panqkart is a new WIP kart racing game. You can now play it at panqkart.minetest.land, port: 30001

## In Other News <a name="o-news"></a>

### BLOCKALOT

The BLOCKALOT team is currently in the process of translating its [BLOCKALOT minetest server dashboard](https://www.blockalot.de) and companion wiki into English. Take a look if you are interested in how to use Minetest for future-oriented learning! If you need assistance, the BLOCKALOT team is happy to help with any questions in English, French, and German.
