---
layout: post
title: "August - This Month in Minetest (07)"
authors: [MisterE]
editors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - Elceejo
  - TheMalaysianDude
  - Ineva
  - Kimapr
description: >
  While not much happened in August with engine development due to a post
  release break, a few mods were released that are worth checking out.
image: /static/blog/2022_August/monstrum_moment.png
# forum_topic:
tags:
  - last_month
---


While not much happened in August with engine development due to a post-release
break, a few mods were released that are worth checking out.

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)


## Engine News

Engine development has been in a lull since the 5.6.0 release, as developers
take a break and deal with other responsibilities.

Android hasn't received 5.6 yet due to a game-breaking crash. Work has been done
towards a 5.6.1 release to fix this, and several other bugs. This will be
released in September.

Work continued towards modernising the graphics pipeline with a post-processing
stage. This has since been merged.


## Mods News

### Multidecor

[Multidecor](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Andrey01/multidecor/) by
[Andrey01](https://content.luanti.org/users/Andrey01/) brings a bit of realism
to your world with home furnishings from several different periods.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/multidecor.png"
    caption="The Grandfather clock even has a swinging pendulum" %}

### Direction Compass

[Direction Compass](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/direction_compass/)
is a new compass mod by [Apercy](https://content.luanti.org/users/apercy/).
It intends to avoid confusion caused by the misleading yaw value in the
builtin debug screen. Having a compass in your inventory puts a HUD element on
the screen with your position. When the compass is wielded, a live-updating
compass HUD will also appear.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/direction_compass.jpg"
    caption="Direction Compass" %}

### BeTween API

[BeTween API](https://content.luanti.org/packages/_gianpy_/api_between/) by
[Gianpy](https://content.luanti.org/users/_gianpy_/) is a new interpolation
API that can be used for smoothly animating HUD elements, as well as anything
else that needs smooth interpolation using a collection of available rules. You
can choose from linear, sinusoidal, circular, quartic, quadratic and elastic
interpolation methods. Here is a demo of it in action:

{% include youtube.html id="FzuNvx5aFR8" %}

### Teaser

Finally, Elceejo shares this vague teaser for an upcoming mod,
"Where's Waldo"-style:

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/monstrum_moment.png"
    caption="Monstrum Moment" %}

## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/the_beast_awakens.png"
    caption="The Beast Awakens by TheMalaysianDude" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/turtle.jpg"
    caption="Turtle. Build by Coolstorms, photo by Ineva" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_August/cottage.png"
    caption="Cottage by Elektrika" %}

## Server News

### Nonsensical Skyblock
<sub>kimapr.net:30001</sub>

Nonsensical skyblock has come online! Unlike other skyblocks, this one is
not quest-based. You can make everything through crafting and other
mechanics, starting from a dirt block and an apple tree. You can also
automate most crafting processes.

## In Other News

There was not much activity this month, but that has changed in September.
We will have more to share in the next post. See you all soon!
