---
layout: post
title:  "May - This Month in Minetest (04)"
authors: [MisterE]
editors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - ExeVirus
description: >
  This month, Minetest 5.5.1 was released, we reached less than 90 PRs and 1000
  issues, and there's been big improvements to performance, rendering and
  stability. We also have a new mapping mod and fully-walkable Airships.
image: /static/blog/2022_May/izzyscastle.webp
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28227
tags:
  - last_month
---

This month, Minetest 5.5.1 was released, we reached less than 90 PRs and 1000
issues, and there's been big improvements to performance, rendering and
stability. We also have a new mapping mod and fully-walkable Airships.

<!-- more -->

*  [Engine](#engine)
*  [Games](#games)
*  [Mods](#mods)
*  [Art/Builds](#art)
*  [Server News](#s-news)
*  [In Other News](#o-news)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### Fewer than 90 PRs and 1000 issues

For the first time in a long time, Minetest finally has fewer than 90 open PRs
and 1000 open issues. A big thank you to the Development Team for speeding up
the pace of development, and to Zughy for triaging the issues and PRs and
closing the ones that could safely be closed.

### 10,000 commits

Minetest reached 10,000 commits! A commit is a change to the code and could be
a feature, bug fix, or maintenance change. Given that Minetest was first started
in 2011, this works out to be an average of 72 commits per month.

### Last Month's Development

May saw 85 commits to master, 57 PRs merged, and 122 issues closed.

Minetest 5.5.1 was released last month. It fixes a whole
[list of bugs](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.5.0_.E2.86.92_5.5.1),
including several security issues resulting in crashes. Minetest 5.5.0's
release on Android was cancelled due to crashes, 5.5.1 fixes these issues.

x2048 improved the rendering performance of snow and other simple nodeboxes by
not drawing hidden faces. Of course, this only applies to opaque nodes where the
faces are truly hidden. x2048 also improved soft shadows, by implementing
better presets and better filters.

There has been loads of performance improvements and bug fixes this past month.
Part of the process of reducing the number of open issues has been reproducing
bugs and fixing them.

Look out for Minetest 5.5.2 soon, and the 5.6.0 release is planned
for July.

### Upcoming Development

rubenwardy has finished work on an upgrade to the Select Mods dialog that shows
more helpful information when there are missing dependencies, and it's currently
going through review. This is part of a general effort to improve user experience.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/mod_config.png" caption="Dependency errors in the Select Mods dialog" %}

Zughy published his
[main menu redesign proposal](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues/6733#issuecomment-1130349592)
to receive feedback. This is just a mockup, images created to show what it could
look like. Whilst there has been some effort in turning this into reality, the
current stage of development is to receive feedback and build consensus.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/mainmenu.png" caption="Mockup of the load game dialog in Zughy's mainmenu redesign proposal" %}

Minetest uses Axis-Aligned Bounding Boxes (AABB) for collision and selecting
nodes/objects. This is a fancy way of saying boxes which don't rotate: the boxes
are *aligned* to the grid directions (=axis).

LMD is implementing support for
[rotating selection boxes](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/12379),
which will allow mobs and players to have more accurate hitboxes. This doesn't
change collision boxes, as it's much harder to rotate them - you'd need to
handle how two rotated boxes would collide with each other.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/rotating_selection.png" caption="Rotating selection boxes" %}

rubenwardy has been working on a window information API that will allow mods to
get the player's window resolution and DPI. He has also been working on an API
to get the player's input methods, such as keyboard, touchscreen, or gamepad.
Together, these will allow mods to make GUIs more responsive and fit the screen
better.

## Game News <a name="games"></a>

### Nodecore
Since March, Warr1024 has been working on translations for Nodecore. Now there
are practically complete translations in Russian, French, and German. Also, many
things have been improved with the optics automation systems. The new features
especially improve optics' detection capabilities.

### Exile
Exile 0.3.7 is out! Among other improvements, the highlights are improved
airboats, multiplayer node protection for some valuable items, and the
beginnings of translation support.

### Cascade

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/cascade.png" caption="A Cascade of mazes" %}

Cascade is a new maze game. While other maze games have been released, this one
is unique in that each new maze level is laid out before you before you enter
it, giving you a chance to plan your route to the exit. Once entered, the walls
are too high to see over. It is an interesting take on the maze game theme.

## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>

### Xmaps
{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/xmaps.png" caption="Treasure Maps for Minetest" %}

[xmaps](https://content.luanti.org/packages/erlehmann/xmaps/) is a new mod by [erle](https://content.luanti.org/users/erlehmann/) that adds treasure-maps to
the HUD. You get them by rightclicking a mapping kit. You can mark the spot with
an X by rightclicking a node. Treasure Hunt, anyone?

### Steampunk Blimp

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/blimp_1.png" caption="Exploring the Skies, screenshot by ShadMOrdre" %}

[Apercy's](https://content.luanti.org/users/apercy/)
[Airship](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/steampunk_blimp/) allows
you to walk around on it while it flies. It aims for a sense of immersion, with
a fire and steam engine sound, and being able to refill the water tank by
landing on water. It brings a sense of adventure and mystique to any game as
you fly off into the distance with a couple of friends.

### Texture Generator
[LMD's](https://content.luanti.org/users/LMD/) new [texture generator
mod](https://content.luanti.org/packages/LMD/texgen/) lets you recolor any
texture pack into a given color pallete.

### Quikbild
[MisterE's](https://content.luanti.org/users/MisterE/)
[Quikbild](https://content.luanti.org/packages/MisterE/quikbild/) minigame has
been updated to support gameplay in several languages, concurrently. Now you can
have fun in your own language (if it's English, Italian, Spanish, French, or
German), or practice and challenge yourself in another language.

### Spiradilus release
[Spiradilus](https://content.luanti.org/packages/ElCeejo/spiradilus/),
a huge crocodile boss featured in March's post, was released on ContentDB.

## Art and Builds <a name="art"></a>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/izzyscastle.webp" caption="Izzyb's castle on Land of Catastrophe. Truly an amazing accomplishment given the difficulty of the game." %}

## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

### From Minigames Galore and A.E.S. Minigames:
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

The 3rd Blockleague tournament is planned for Friday, June 24 at 21:30 - 23:15,
GMT+1. The event will be a direct elimination competition between teams of 3
players. The winners will get a chat prefix and statues in the lobby until the
next tournament. There are still 3 team slots left; to find people to team up
with or to register your team, join us on
[matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#arcadeemulationserver:matrix.org) or
[IRC](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.freeirc.org#minigames-discuss).

## In Other News <a name="o-news"></a>

Minetest was represented this past month at the Svilupparty game dev conference
in Bologna, Italy by Zughy, Crazyminer, and \_Zaizen\_. Visitors had the chance
to play Alter, PRANG, Mineclone5, and their server AES (Arcade Emulation
Server).

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/silvuparty.png" caption="Zughy and friends represent Minetest at a game conference in Italy." %}
