---
layout: post
title:  "July - This Month in Minetest (06)"
authors: [rubenwardy, MisterE]
contributors:
  - chrbinder
  - Lemente
  - komodo
  - Srjskam
  - Thunder1035
  - Hume2
  - x2048
  - Apercy
  - Franzopow
  - Arekusei
description: >
  Last month, developers worked on releasing 5.6.0, and x2048 started work on
  post-processing and god rays for 5.7. MeseCraft has an important update, as
  well as a few interesting mods. Finally, Minetest was shown off at the
  exploreandlearn@LMZ edutech conference, with talks and workshops.
image: /static/blog/2022_July/cover.png
image_has_full: true
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28538
tags:
  - last_month
exploreandlearnscreenshots:
  - src: /static/blog/2022_July/LMZworkshop1.png
    caption: Workshop screenshots by chbinder

  - src: /static/blog/2022_July/LMZworkshop2.png
    caption: Workshop screenshots by chbinder
---

Last month, developers worked on releasing 5.6.0, and x2048 started work on
post-processing and god rays for 5.7. MeseCraft has an important update, as well
as a few interesting mods. Finally, Minetest was shown off at the
exploreandlearn@LMZ edutech conference, with talks and workshops.

<!-- more -->

*  [Engine](#engine)
*  [Education](#edu)
*  [Games](#games)
*  [Mods](#mods)
*  [Art/Builds](#art)
*  [Server News](#s-news)
*  [In Other News](#o-news)


## Engine News <a name="engine"></a>

### 5.6.0 release

The main focus of July was releasing Minetest 5.6.0, which happened on August
4th. Read all about it in [the dedicated blog post](/2022/08/04/5.6.0-released/).

One of the features added to Minetest 5.6.0 was an improved particle system,
with more control over animation and physics. Here are some demos made by x2048:

{% include youtube.html id="z1PERXV3adw" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/coloredtorches.png"
  caption="<a href='https://github.com/x2048/colored_torches'>Fake colored torches</a> using particle spawners with the new API. See the test mod here" %}

### New graphics pipeline, with post-processing and new effects

x2048 has been continuing to implement a new post-processing framework. This
is part of the graphics modernization project and will result in improved
performance for tone mapping.

He has now developed some work-in-progress shaders that use the new pipeline,
including volumetric lighting (god rays), depth of field, and bloom.

{% include youtube.html id="zRDKhoOHyTk" caption="Volumetric lighting (god rays) prototype demo" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/dof.png" full=true caption="Depth of Field prototype, subtly blurring the background" %}



## Education <a name="edu"></a>

### exploreandlearn@lmz

Minetest was featured at
[exploreandlearn@LMZ](https://www.lmz-bw.de/veranstaltungen/exploreandlearnlmz/)
([translation here](https://www-lmz--bw-de.translate.goog/veranstaltungen/exploreandlearnlmz/?_x_tr_sl=auto&_x_tr_tl=en&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp)),
a German online Educator Instruction event from July 3rd to July 6th. Teachers
and others interested in education could participate in workshops and
presentations from the three categories - 'playandlearn', 'buildandlearn', and
'codeandlearn' - each using minetest to reinforce educational goals.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/exploreandlearnlogo.jpg" caption="exploreandlearn@LMZ logo" %}

On Tuesday, July 5, there was a one-day workshop concerned with future-oriented
learning and how to develop learning scenarios for educational contexts. The
workshop was held by Chris Binder and Tammo Engelhard, who are both freelance
trainers for the Landesmedienzentrum Baden-Württemberg, Germany (LMZ BW). In the
workshop, teachers were introduced to Minetest and its learning potential.
Starting from some gameplay examples, the participants developed learning
scenarios in small groups and later on, built prototypes of their ideas.

On Thursday, July 7, two shorter workshops were held to introduce a map template
that can be used by teachers in conjunction with the
[BLOCKALOT web dashboard](https://www.blockalot.de/) for Minetest servers.
The swampy landscape offers different points of interest that each pose their
own challenges to the learners. These points of interest can be modified by
teachers to cater to their curricula or intended learning outcomes. However, it
is crucial that learners remain active and not just passive recipients of
knowledge. One point of interest is an area with floating islands and an old
house that needs to be renovated with sustainability in mind. Then, the learners
choose sustainable development goals themselves and build the settlement
according to their own plans. The whole group can discuss and evaluate the
results after the building phase. The players are provided with useful materials
in a cave, where they may also write ideas about sustainable building on the
walls.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.exploreandlearnscreenshots %}

### BLOCKALOT

The BLOCKALOT team is currently in the process of translating its
[BLOCKALOT minetest server dashboard](https://www.blockalot.de) and
[companion wiki](https://wiki.blockalot.de/) into English. Take a look if you
are interested in how to use Minetest for future-oriented learning! If you need
assistance, the BLOCKALOT team is happy to help with any questions in English,
French, and German.


## Game News <a name="games"></a>
### Mesecraft

Apercy's
[helicopters](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/nss_helicopter/) were
added to the game, with minor modifications. They now require oil (from deep
underground) to use as fuel, and they can carry a passenger. Helicopters were
a much-missed feature, and now they are back! Also, Mesecraft is now available
[from ContentDB](https://content.luanti.org/packages/MeseCraft/mesecraft/),
making it easy to install in-game.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/mesecraft_helicopter.png" caption="Cleared for Takeoff" %}

## Mod News <a name="mods"></a>

###  Wilhelmines Natural Biomes

Liil made
[a new biomes mod](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Liil/naturalbiomes/)
that adds many well-designed biomes to the game. Included are: Wet Savanna,
Outback, Alder Swamp, Alpine, Beach, Bamboo Forest and Mediterranean biomes.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/Outback2.png" caption="Liil's Outback Biome" %}

### Tides and Floods

Lemente has been working on a [mod](https://github.com/Lemente/TidesAndFloods)
that simulates tides in real-time. It started out as a fork of
[Tides](https://content.luanti.org/packages/markthesmeagol/tides/) by
MarkTheSmeagol, which allowed Lemente to prototype a few ideas quickly.

Lemente split the sea into multiple types of nodes, which minimizes the number
of active ABMs instead of having all ocean nodes run the same ABM. He also
spread the ABM load by making the tides spread in waves. The mod also permits
water to be raised above the original sea level, for some dramatic floodings.
Other features are planned; contributors are welcome!

You can try out the WIP mod [here](https://github.com/Lemente/TidesAndFloods).

{% include video.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/lemente_tides.mp4" caption="Tides raising the water level in a river valley" %}

### Worm Farm

The [Worm Farm](https://content.luanti.org/packages/sirrobzeroone/worm_farm/)
mod by sirrobzeroone lets you farm worms for the ethereal mod's fishing feature
without digging up a lot of dirt.

### Steampunk Blimp

You may remember Apercy's
[Steampunk blimp](https://content.luanti.org/packages/apercy/steampunk_blimp/)
from last month... well, now he has added a compass feature as well as the
ability to paint the blimp while onboard.


## Art/Builds <a name="art"></a>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/ship.png" caption="Island Cruise by Srjskam" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_July/modernhouse.png" caption="Modern House by Thunder1035" %}


## Server News <a name="s-news"></a>

### A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

The time has come to announce the next Block League tournament!

Friday, September 9 from 19:30 - 21:30, UTC+0

Prepare yourself: if you think you're good enough, you're not. This time,
instead of playing the entire tournament on Station 2, we'll play the
quarterfinals on Hyperium map, meaning more training, sweat and tears. Are you
up for the challenge? There will be 8 teams of 3 players each. The contest
format is direct elimination. The tournament will be held on the Hyperium and
Station 2 maps.

How to apply: Join either the
[#minetest-aes:matrix.org Matrix room](https://matrix.to/#/#minetest-aes:matrix.org)
or on IRC at
[irc.freeirc.org #minigames-discuss](https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.freeirc.org#minigames-discuss).
Tell us who your team is or look for people to team up with there.

Applications close on Wednesday, August 31 or when 8 teams are reached.

### Tunnelers' Abyss
<sub>37.46.208.34:30000</sub>

On 29th June 2022, the extension of the express line R2 on Tunnelers' Abyss was
opened. It was elongated by 7.4 km, reaching its total length 15 km. This makes
line R2 the longest train line in Tunnelers' Abyss. It leads from Will Beach
via Spawn and File not Found to Docker and reaches the maximum speed 160 km/h.
The prior record was held by line S1 with a length of 13.1 km, spanning from
Southern Cliff to Fort Harko.

While building this extension, it was necessary to cope with several challenges.
The track passes over Fourier Mountains and Trolly Hills. The slope from File
not Found, the previous endpoint of R2, up to Noot Noot is quite flat. However,
the slope from Noot Noot down to Densevlad is very steep and therefore it was
necessary to choose a longer curvy trajectory. The maximal speed there drops to
90 km/h. Trolly Hills are not higher than Fourier Mountains but they are very
jaggy in some places. Therefore, it was necessary to dig two tunnels. On the
other hand, the Legendrian Basin is quite flat and building the track there was
a pleasure. The track ends at the Docker station, which is both a train station
and a harbour.

### Panqkart
<sub>panqkart.minetest.land:30001</sub>

Panqkart is a new WIP kart racing game. You can now play it at panqkart.minetest.land, port: 30001

## In Other News <a name="o-news"></a>

AntVenom, a Minecraft YouTuber with over 3 million subscribers, made a video
about Minetest. It's very well researched and captures what makes Minetest
unique. It's worth a watch, whether you've been with Minetest for a while or
have only just discovered it.

{% include youtube.html id="g6Fyav6FiIs" %}
