---
layout: post
title: "January - Last Month in Minetest (10)"
authors: [MisterE]
editors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - Warr1024
  - Zughy
  - Phii
  - BuckarooBanzai
  - Sumi
  - CalebJ
  - Lemente
  - EmptyStar
  - Sakel
  - josiah_wi
description: >
  In this update, we cover several engine improvements from the last two months,
  Backrooms Test's first release, and more.
image: /static/blog/2023_January/sakel_header.png
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29202
tags:
  - last_month
otp:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/otp_qrcode.png
  caption: Setup formspec for the authenticator app

- src: /static/blog/2023_January/otp_verify.png
  caption: Verification prompt when joining the server
backrooms:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_1.png
  caption: Level 96 in Backrooms
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_2.png
  caption: Level 62 in Backrooms
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_3.png
  caption: Level 17 in Backrooms
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_4.png
  caption: Level 0 in Backrooms
asuna:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/asuna1.png
  caption: Trees and the moon in Asuna
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/asuna2.png
  caption: A river and hills in Asuna
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/asuna3.png
  caption: Looking out from a cave in Asuna
everness:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/everness_coral_forest.png
  caption: Coral Forest
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/everness_crystal_forest.png
  caption: Crystal Forest
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/everness_forsaken_desert.png
  caption: Forsaken Desert
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/giant_sequoia.png
  caption: Giant Sequoia
---

In this update, we cover several engine improvements from the last two months,
Backrooms Test's first release, and more.

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Education](#education)


## Engine News

x2048 worked on several performance improvements in December. In order to
show blocks, the client needs to turn them into 3d geometry called meshes. x2048
made the mesh generator multithreaded, which will improve performance at large
view ranges. Another thing x2048 worked on was a better occlusion algorithm
which is used to decide which parts of the map should be rendered.

sfan5 submitted the [first version](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13092)
of multithreaded Lua mapgen. This will allow mapgen mods to be much faster,
almost as fast as builtin mapgen.

kilbith finally submitted his new
[camera API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13052) in December,
which will allow mods to place and control cameras. The possibilities allowed by
this API are widespread - some examples include cutscenes, RTS cameras, and CCTV.

Andrey2470T submitted a
[3d lines PR](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13020) which could be
used for fishing lines and power networks.

{% include video.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/fishing.mp4" caption="Fishing" %}


In January, josiah_wi and jordan4ibanez have been working on a modern model file
format (.glTF) for minetest. So far, static models are working, and animations
are well on their way to being implemented. When complete, this will remove the
need for installing blender addons to create models for minetest, as .glTF is
a common format for 3d modelling applications.

## Games News

### Backrooms Test

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.backrooms %}

[Backrooms Test](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Sumianvoice/backroomtest/)
by [Sumi](https://content.luanti.org/users/Sumianvoice/) is a game inspired by
the original backrooms concept. You've glitched through reality into this
strange place. Is there a way out? Are you alone in here?

The goal of this game is to explore liminal spaces, to be lost and alone, and to
aimlessly wander.  There are no items to gather, no creatures to run from, and
no tasks to do. There are just huge, near-infinite expanses filled with
unsettling, uncanny architecture. There are ambient sounds, different biomes and
areas to explore, and a constant nagging feeling that something might be just
around the corner. The game builds on the original Backrooms concept: fear of
the unknown, strangely unsettling spaces, and helpless isolation. It produces
feelings of being thrust into a foriegn yet strangely familiar environment.

### Asuna

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.asuna %}

[Asuna](https://content.luanti.org/packages/EmptyStar/asuna/) by
[EmptyStar](https://content.luanti.org/users/EmptyStar/) is a new
work-in-progress game that brings together some of the very best biome and world
decoration mods that the Minetest community has to offer. Journey through a
potpourri of natural wonders as you traverse beautiful and breathtaking
landscapes. Forests, meadows, jungles, tundras, deserts, swamps, and more await
you at every horizon.

The game's purpose is to collect many wonderful biome mods into a single world.
It does not provide other deep game mechanics; those are still left to
individuals to assemble from ContentDB.

### Piranesi Restoration Project

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/piranesi_clockroom.jpg"
    caption="The Clock Room in Piranesi" %}


[Warr1024](https://content.luanti.org/users/Warr1024/) has continued
development on iarbat's game jam submission "Piranesi". The original had several
bugs that made it impossible to finish the game.
[Piranesi Restoration Project](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Warr1024/piranesi_redo/)
aims to recreate the puzzles in Piranesi as originally intended, but with
bugfixes, refinements, quality-of-life improvements, improved accessibility, and
translations. iarbat does not intend to continue the original Piranesi at this
time, and endorses Piranesi Restoration Project as its successor.

The game is about exploring an infinite and space-warping house, and trying to
solve the mysteries inside.

## Mods News

### Everness Biomes

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.everness %}

[Everness](https://bitbucket.org/minetest_gamers/everness/src/master/) is a WIP
biomes mod by [Sakel](https://content.luanti.org/users/sakel/), which aims to
provide an endless array of beautiful biomes from the surface lands to the
caverns with custom-painted textures. It creates both a sense of discovery and of
danger when one lands in the wrong biome. It also adds structures, dungeons with
loot chests, and custom skyboxes based on the biome.

This month's header is a cave biome from Everness.

### Dungeon Generator

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/dungeons.png"
    caption="Dungeons in Minetest Game" %}

[Phii](https://content.luanti.org/users/Phii/) released a procedural dungeon
generator called [randungeon](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Phii/randungeon/)
for complex randomized dungeons, complete with treasure rooms, forest caves and
randomized materials, using almost exclusively the blocks provided by Minetest
Game. It is perhaps the most advanced dungeon generator written for Minetest
Game so far.

### Arena_lib

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/arenalibsign.png"
    caption="New signs interface" %}

[Arena_lib](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Zughy/arena_lib/) 5.4 is out!
arena_lib's goal is to do Minetest minigames much better. In arena_lib 5.4,
[Zughy](https://content.luanti.org/users/Zughy/) has created a new interface
for each minigame sign that when right-clicked shows who is currently inside the
minigame as well as the arena's info and a picture of the arena. Also, it makes
life easier for server admins: they can now perform several actions with the new
`/arenas` built-in command and customise their server's media with the arena_lib
world folder. Finally, spectators can now enter arenas without having to leave
the match.

All the updates can be seen on the A.E.S. Minigames server!

### Blockexchange

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/blockexchange.png"
    caption="The Blockexchange interface" %}

[Blockexchange](https://blockexchange.minetest.ch/) by
[BuckarooBanzai](https://content.luanti.org/users/BuckarooBanzay/) got a few
new features, including the possibility to update the uploaded schematics
incrementally; that means larger builds can be updated in smaller parts without
uploading the whole build again.

Blockexchange is an online service that allows players to backup and share their
builds. It has a
[companion mod](https://content.luanti.org/packages/BuckarooBanzay/blockexchange/)
that allows schematics to be uploaded or downloaded and placed.


### OTP

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.otp %}


[OTP](https://content.luanti.org/packages/mt-mods/otp/) is a mod by
[BuckarooBanzai](https://content.luanti.org/users/BuckarooBanzay/) which
allows security-conscious players to optionally protect their player accounts
with a second factor authentication method. It is published under the
[mt-mods](https://content.luanti.org/users/mt-mods/) umbrella.


## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/ercavica.png"
    caption="Central Ercavica, a medieval city built by doggo on Tunnelers' Abyss, shot by CalebJ" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/waltons.png"
    caption="An industrial facility in Walton's Forest, a 19th-century-themed city built by TomBuilder on Tunnelers' Abyss. Shot by pups." %}

## Education

[Lemente](https://content.luanti.org/users/lemente/) has made a Discord server
dedicated to the using Minetest for Education, Workshops, and other related
activities! It is a place made for discussing existing projects, sharing
resources and helping each other.

Join here: <https://discord.gg/hUs9xT634S>

Lemente started it because there are many people trying to use Minetest for
educational purposes but their projects usually remain at the prototype stage.
Starting a Minetest project requires a specific set of skills such as creating a
game, hosting a server, using moderation tools within the game, developing
custom mods, etc. Learning everything can be a complicated and time consuming
task for teachers, educators and workshop facilitators.

The goal of the discord server is to bring together anyone interested in using
Minetest as a virtual tool for education, artistic workshops, citizen
participation in urban planning, or any other practical use one might think of.
It will allow people to learn from existing projects, share specific resources,
and create new ones together.
