---
layout: post
title: "February - Last Month in Minetest (11)"
authors: [MisterE]
contributors:
  - rubenwardy
  - Zughy
  - Wuzzy
  - Sakel
  - Peppermint Patty
  - ROllerozxa
description: >
  In February, a method for getting clients' game window information was added and
  map viewing performance was greatly improved. Repixture added boats, and there
  is a new artistic server on the serverlist.
image: /static/blog/2023_February/header.png
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29276
tags:
  - last_month
repixture:
- src: /static/blog/2023_February/repixture_boats.png
  caption: A player riding a raft in Repixture
- src: /static/blog/2023_February/repixture_airweed.png
  caption: Airweed seen growing underwater
---

In February, a method for getting clients' game window information was added and
map viewing performance was greatly improved. Repixture added boats, and there is a new
artistic server on the serverlist.

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Server News](#server-news)


## Engine News

This month, rubenwardy's `minetest.get_player_window_information()` PR was
finally merged, which will allow mods to get the client's window size. The new
information will make it possible to design responsive formspecs that fit
properly on each client's screen.

x2048's work on making meshes the size of 8 mapblocks was also merged this
month, allowing for vastly greater view distances. Reducing the number of meshes
drawn makes better use of the GPU thereby improving performance or allowing even
greater view distances at the same framerates.

GreenXenith contributed a feature that allows chat to be disabled on servers,
giving more control to games and mods. This could be used for hiding chat during
cut scenes or for mods that implement their own chat system.

Additionally, x2048 is continuing graphics improvement work with a PR to add
shader-based antialiasing filters. This allows for improved performance over the
current fixed pipeline antialiasing filters.

Unfortunately, Jude Melton-Houghton (TurkeyMcMac / jwmhjwmh)
[passed away](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29161) in early
February. While he was only a core developer for a short time, he made a huge
impact on the Minetest project and will be greatly missed by the community.

### Upcoming

At the time of writing, Minetest is in a feature freeze in preparation for the
5.7 release. During this time, the developers are focusing on fixing bugs and
preparing for the release - features and unnecessary changes are avoided.

Now is the time to test the
[release candidate](https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29249),
and submit any bug reports so that they can be fixed before the release.
Server owners and mod/game authors are especially encouraged to test the
release candidate to ensure a smooth upgrade.

Minetest 5.7.0 is due to be released on March 19, but this date may be pushed
back if needed.


## Games News

### Repixture

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.repixture %}

[Wuzzy](https://content.luanti.org/users/Wuzzy/) has added a
large selection of boats to
[Repixture](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Wuzzy/repixture/) in the
"The Nautical Update" which includes various types of rafts and log boats. Each
style has its handling mechanics. Additionally, a new type of seaweed lets you
collect air to stay underwater longer. Other water-related and miscellaneous
improvements were also added.

### Minesweeper 3d

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_February/minesweeper3d.png"
    caption="Minesweeper in Minetest" %}

[Hume2](https://content.luanti.org/users/Hume2/) has created a game inspired
by Minesweeper in Minetest. Like the original,
[Minesweeper 3d's](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Hume2/minesweeper_3d/)
goal is to survive as long as possible without setting off a mine. The game can
be more challenging in its 3D version since there are 26 neighbors to each block
instead of 8. Currently, the port has no end when one sets off a mine; a
scoreboard is planned for a future update.

### Panqkart

{% include youtube.html id="Eo12J2MjM6Q" %}

Longer races are now possible in [Panquesito7's](https://content.luanti.org/users/Panquesito7/) work-in-progress kart racing game
[Panqkart](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Panquesito7/panqkart/) with a recent update that allows races to have multiple laps.

## Mods News

### Offhand Items

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_February/lefthand.png"
    caption="Look Ma, *Both* hands!" %}

[TestificateMods](https://content.luanti.org/users/TestificateMods/) has made
a fork of Mineclone's ability to have a left-hand item slot for use with
Minetest Game. [Offhand Items](https://content.luanti.org/packages/TestificateMods/offhand/)
supports wielded light, allowing one to carry a torch and a pickaxe at the same
time. Items switch hands at the press of a button.

## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_February/temple.png"
    caption="Interior of a Greek temple from the Hellenistic period by Peppermint Patty" %}

## Server News

### MTPlace
<sub>voxelmanip.se:30002</sub>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_February/mtplace.png"
    caption="The current state of the MTPlace canvas" %}

mtPlace is a canvas 512x512 pixels in size. You have 24 colors at your disposal.
What will you make?

Inspired by the Reddit r/place social experiments that took place during 2017
and 2022, mtPlace is a collaborative canvas hosted as a Minetest server. You
paint the canvas by placing nodes on it within Minetest, and it will show up on
the map that updates every 5 minutes.

The server is available on the Minetest server list (just search for "mtPlace"),
and at `voxelmanip.se:30002`.
You can also view the map live at <https://mtplace.voxelmanip.se/>

### A.E.S. Minigames
<sub>minetest.eticadigitale.org:30010</sub>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_February/aes3d.png"
    caption="3d weapons" %}

Some great improvements have been happening on A.E.S.
Blockleague and Fantasy Brawl now have 3d models for weapons. In Blockleague,
each weapon has its own pixel art crosshair.
