---
layout: post
title: "Minetest 5.8.0 released!"
authors: [rubenwardy]
contributors:
  - rollerozxa
  - luatic
  - grorp
  - TheShadowOfHassen
  - srifqi
  - GreenXenith
description: >-
  Minetest 5.8.0 has been released with improved onboarding, a new Settings
  GUI, and improved Android controls
image: /static/blog/5.8.0/cover.jpg
image_credit: Wuzzy
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?t=30005
tags:
  - release

mtg_debundle:
  - src: /static/blog/5.8.0/debundle_no_games.png
    caption: >-
      What new players will see when they open up Minetest.

  - src: /static/blog/5.8.0/debundle_cdb.png
    caption: >-
      Games you can install. This is the next thing we'll be redesigning.
---

<h2 class="sr-only">Introduction</h2>

Minetest 5.8.0 has been released with improved onboarding, a new Settings GUI,
improved Android controls, and a lot more.

You can download Minetest from
[our website](https://www.minetest.net/downloads/).
Also, check out
[the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.7.0_.E2.86.92_5.8.0).

<!-- more -->

### Table of Contents

- [Minetest no longer ships with a default game](#minetest-no-longer-ships-with-a-default-game)
- [New Settings GUI](#new-settings-gui)
- [Improved Android controls](#improved-android-controls)
- [Rewritten sound support](#rewritten-sound-support)
- [...and more](#and-more)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)


## Minetest no longer ships with a default game

Minetest is not a game - it's a game creation platform that allows you to make
your own blocky gaming experiences. Developers can
[make](https://rubenwardy.com/minetest_modding_book/) and share games. Players
can [find](https://content.luanti.org/) and play games using the Minetest
client.

For a long time, Minetest shipped with a default game called
[Minetest Game](https://content.luanti.org/packages/Minetest/minetest_game/).
This game was intentionally left bare to encourage players to mod the game and
try out other games for Minetest. However, this led to new users thinking that
Minetest Game was all Minetest had to offer.

From 5.8.0, users will instead be directed to choose a game when first starting
Minetest. Minetest Game will still be available to download, but the user will
see other games as well. This gives greater visibility to the wide range
Minetest has to offer.

Note: you can still play multiplayer without installing any games.

We'll be improving the new user experience in the future, based on feedback.

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.mtg_debundle %}


## New Settings GUI

Minetest 5.8.0 comes with a new settings menu, designed to make it easier for
new users to find and change settings.

We're going to be giving the entire main menu a makeover in a future release.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/5.8.0/settings.png" caption="The new settings menu" %}


## Improved Android controls

You can now place nodes using a single tap on Android. This makes building much
easier.

The Android joystick used to emulate key presses but is now read directly. This
will make movement more responsive to user input, allowing the player to move in
any direction and at varying speeds.


## Rewritten sound support

Minetest's sound code has been completely rewritten. This improves performance,
fixes bugs, and unlocks new capabilities.

Sounds are now lazy-loaded - this reduces memory usage and load times by only
loading long sounds when needed.

Game developers and modders have more options on how to play sound, including
changing the start time and offsets.


## ...and more

The anti-aliasing code has been improved and modernised. There's now the option
to choose between two new algorithms - FXAA and SSAA. FXAA is faster but is less
accurate. SSAA is very accurate but consumes more resources.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/5.8.0/antialiasing.webp" caption="A magnified screenshot showing how anti-aliasing smooths pixels (rollerozxa)" %}

As always, this release comes with new scripting features for game developers
and modders. For example, developers can now change the texture of an item stack
completely dynamically. This unlocks a lot of possibilities.


## Conclusion

Those are just the highlights. Take a look at
[the changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.7.0_.E2.86.92_5.8.0) for
a full list of changes.

We've already started working on 5.9.0. There's a ContentDB dialog ("browse
online content") redesign in progress, and work continues on switching to SDL
for improved input and gamepad support. Make sure to follow the Minetest blog to
keep up-to-date with engine development and community news.
