---
layout: post
title: "Minetest 5.7.0 released!"
author: rubenwardy
# contributors: []
description: >-
  Minetest 5.7.0 has been released with improved graphics, performance
  improvements
image: /static/blog/5.6.0/cover.jpg
# forum_topic:
tags:
  - release

perf:
  - src: /static/blog/5.7.0/steam_deck_740.png
    caption: "Steam Deck: 740 view range at 55 FPS"
---

Minetest 5.7.0 has been released with improved graphics, performance
improvements

You can download Minetest from
[our website](https://www.minetest.net/downloads/).
Also check out
[the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.6.0_.E2.86.92_5.7.0).

<!-- more -->


- [Graphics and Performance](#graphics-and-performance)
  - [Post-processing: Bloom and Dynamic Exposure](#post-processing-bloom-and-dynamic-exposure)
  - [Improved Performance: 1000 View Range on Modern Gaming Hardware](#improved-performance-1000-view-range-on-modern-gaming-hardware)
  - [Other Performance Improvements](#other-performance-improvements)
- [Rotating Entity Selection/Hit Boxes](#rotating-entity-selectionhit-boxes)
- [Android Fixed Crosshair](#android-fixed-crosshair)
- [...and more](#and-more)
- [Links](#links)



## Graphics and Performance

### Post-processing: Bloom and Dynamic Exposure

Minetest now has a post-processing pipeline, with support for Bloom and
Dynamic Exposure. This pipeline will allow for new effects to be implemented in the
future, such as depth-of-field and volumetric lighting (god rays).
Post-processing also improves the performance of tone mapping and allows for
settings like saturation adjustment.

Mods and games have control over whether these effects can be enabled on the
client. Part of Minetest's design philosophy is to give more control to game
creators, this includes giving games more control over graphics.

Dynamic Exposure is a feature that simulates eyes adjusting when going from a
well-lit area into a cave, allowing for high dynamic range (HDR).

### Improved Performance: 1000 View Range on Modern Gaming Hardware

Minetest is well-known for supporting old hardware, but has often not made the
best use of modern and high-end hardware. In 5.7.0, Minetest has a setting that
allows better use of the GPU when uploading world data. This results in vastly
improved performance on modern gaming hardware at 1000+ view ranges.

On the Steam Deck, 1000 view range previously ran at 10 FPS but now runs at 35
FPS. A 740 view range over a forest runs at 55 FPS:

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.perf %}

In order to benefit from this performance improvement, you'll need to change the
"Client Mesh Chunksize" (`client_mesh_chunk`) setting to 4 or 8. To increase
your view range, you'll also need to increase a few more settings:

```py
client_mesh_chunk = 4
# ^ also try 8 if you have a dedicated GPU
viewing_range = 1000
client_mapblock_limit = 5000
max_block_generate_distance = 63
max_block_send_distance = 63
```

### Other Performance Improvements

Performance improvements aren't just limited to modern gaming hardware. The
occlusion culler has been improved, which provides better performance by not
rendering areas that cannot be seen. The culler is faster, too.

In order to display the world, the client needs to turn blocks into 3d geometry
called meshes. The mesh generaor is now multithreaded, which will improve
performance especially at large view ranges.

## Rotating Entity Selection/Hit Boxes

There's now support for rotating selection and hit boxes.
which will allow mobs and players to have more accurate hitboxes.
This will make combat much nicer, especially with larger monsters.
Unfortunately, this is just for selection/hit boxes, it doesn't change
collision.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2022_May/rotating_selection.png" caption="Rotating selection boxes" %}

## Android Fixed Crosshair

Crosshair support for android has been merged. Unlike desktop, Android defaults
to punching/placing/digging where you tap. With this new feature, users can
enable the crosshair to have an experience closer to desktop.

## ...and more

Mods can now find out the player's window size, which will allow for full-screen and more responsive GUIs

## Links

Read [the full changelog](https://dev.minetest.net/Changelog#5.6.0_.E2.86.92_5.7.0).

Downloads:

- [Windows (64-bit)](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.7.0/minetest-5.7.0-win64.zip)
- [Windows (32-bit)](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.7.0/minetest-5.7.0-win32.zip)
- [macOS](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/releases/download/5.7.0/minetest-5.7.0-osx.zip)
- Linux: [Flatpak](https://flathub.org/apps/details/net.minetest.Minetest).
  See [downloads page](https://www.minetest.net/downloads/) for more options
