---
layout: post
title: "December - Last Month in Minetest (10)"
contributors:
  - rubenwardy
description: ""
image: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_cover.png
forum_topic: ""
tags:
  - last_month
---

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)


## Engine News

### Completed work

x2048 worked on quite a few performance improvements in December. In order to
show blocks, the client needs to turn them into 3d geometry called meshes. x2048
made the mesh generator multithreaded, which will improve performance at large
view ranges. Another thing x2048 worked on was a better occlusion algorithm,
this is used to decide which parts of the map should be rendered.

### Upcoming

sfan5 submitted the [first version](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13092)
of multithreaded Lua mapgen. This will allow mapgen mods to be much faster,
almost as fast as builtin mapgen.

kilbith finally submitted his new
[camera API](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13052),
which will allow mods to place and control cameras. The possibilities allowed by
this API are widespread - some examples include cutscenes, RTS cameras, and CCTV.

TurkeyMcMac submitted a
[prototype](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13046) for a new
client-side scripting API. This will replace the current client-side modding
API, and will allow games and mods to run scripts on the client in a new
sandboxed process. It's very early days, a lot needs to be done, but
eventually this will remove a lot of limitations related to client-side
rendering, input, and network latency.

Finally, Andrey2470T submitted a
[3d lines PR](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/13020). This could be
used for fishing lines and power networks.

{% include video.html src="/static/blog/2022_December/fishing.mp4" caption="Fishing" %}

## Mods News


## Art and Builds



## Server News

## In Other News

### Steam Deck: Usage and Review

rubenwardy has written
[a blog post about Minetest on the Steam Deck](https://bog.rubenwardy.com/2022/12/02/minetest-steam-deck/).
It shows how to set up Minetest on the deck, and reviews the controls, performance, and experience.
