---
layout: post
title: "January - Last Month in Minetest (10)"
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - rubenwardy
  - Warr1024
  - Zughy
  - Phii
  - BuckarooBanzai
  - Sumi
  - CalebJ

description: >
  
image: /static/blog/2022_November/glitch_cover.png
#forum_topic: https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=28956
tags:
  - last_month
otp:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/otp_qrcode.png
  caption: Setup formspec for the authenticator app

- src: /static/blog/2023_January/otp_verify.png
  caption: Verification prompt when joining the server

backrooms:
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_1.png
  caption: Level 96
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_2.png
  caption: Level 62
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_3.png
  caption: Level 17
- src: /static/blog/2023_January/br_4.png
  caption: Level 0


---

Description here

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Education](#education)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)


## Engine News

## Games News

### Backrooms Test

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.backrooms %}

[Backrooms Test](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Sumianvoice/backroomtest/) by [Sumi](https://content.minetest.net/users/Sumianvoice/) is a game inspired by the original backrooms concept.
You've glitched through reality into this strange place. Is there a way out? Are
you alone in here? 

The goal of this game is to explore liminal spaces, be lost and alone and
aimlessly wander.  There are no items to gather, no creatures to run from and no
tasks to do. There are simply huge, near-infinite expanses filled with
unsettling, uncanny architecture. There are ambient sounds, different biomes and
areas to explore and a constant nagging feeling that something might be just
around the corner. The game builds on the original backrooms concept: fear of
the unknown, strangely unsettling spaces, and helpless isolation. It produces
feelings of being thrust into a foriegn yet strangely familiar environment.

The project doesn't aim to replicate a particular canon: it sometimes uses
existing content as a reference such as the poolrooms or the hub, but otherwise
generally creates unsettling environments to explore regardless of whether
they've been written about already or not. In the future, it may include an api
to add survival aspects such as looting, hunger, or thirst, but this will only
be a feature supported by the main game. There may be an "official" mod for this
later.

Backrooms Test currently has:
- 15 levels and their environments
- methods for travelling between levels (portal doors)
- a flashlight for use in dark areas
- "achievements" for certain events
- a list of the levels available (unless they're secret)
It's API includes:
- the ability to mod in more levels or change existing ones
- scripted events possibilities

### Piranesi Restoration Project

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/piranesi_clockroom.jpg"
    caption="The Clock Room in Piranesi" %}

[Warr1024](https://content.minetest.net/users/Warr1024/) has continued development on iarbat's game jam submission "Piranesi".
The original had several bugs that made it impossible to finish the game.
[Piranesi Restoration Project](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Warr1024/piranesi_redo/) aims to recreate the puzzles in Piranesi as
originally intended, but with bugfixes, refinements, quality-of-life
improvements, improved accessibility, and translations. iarbat does not intend
to continue the original Piranesi at this time, and endorses Piranesi
Restoration Project as its successor.

The game is about exploring an infinite and space-warping house, and trying to
solve the mysteries inside.

## Mods News

## Dungeon Generator

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/dungeons.png"
    caption="Dungeons in Minetest Game" %}

[Phii](https://content.minetest.net/users/Phii/) released a procedual dungeon generator called [randungeon](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Phii/randungeon/) for
complex randomized dungeons, complete with treasure rooms, forest caves and
randomized materials, using almost exclusively the blocks provided by Minetest
Game. It is perhaps the most advanced dungeon generator written for Minetest
Game so far.

### Arena_lib

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/arenalibsign.png"
    caption="New signs interface" %}

[Arena_lib](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Zughy/arena_lib/) 5.4 is out! Minigames remain a great source of entertainment in the
Minecraft world; arena_lib's goal is to do minigames for Minetest better than
Minecraft does. In arena_lib 5.4, [Zughy](https://content.minetest.net/users/Zughy/) has created a new interface for each
minigame sign that when right-clicked shows who is currently inside the minigame
as well as the arena's info and a picture of the arena. Also, it makes life
easier for server admins: they can now perform several actions with the new
`/arenas` built-in command and customise their server's media with the arena_lib
world folder. Finally, spectators can now enter arenas without having to leave
the match.

All the updates can be seen on the A.E.S. Minigames server!

### Blockexchange

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/blockexchange.png"
    caption="The Blockexchange interface" %}

[Blockexchange](https://blockexchange.minetest.ch/) by [BuckarooBanzai](https://content.minetest.net/users/BuckarooBanzay/) got a few new features, including the
possibility to update the uploaded schematics incrementally, that means larger
builds can be updated in smaller parts without uploading the whole build again.

Blockexchange is an online service that allows players to back and share their
builds. It has a [companion mod](https://content.minetest.net/packages/BuckarooBanzay/blockexchange/) that allows schematics to be uploaded or
downloaded and placed.


### OTP

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.otp %}

[OTP](https://content.minetest.net/packages/mt-mods/otp/) is a mod by [BuckarooBanzai](https://content.minetest.net/users/BuckarooBanzay/) which allows security-conscious players to
optionally protect their player accounts with a second factor authentication
method. It is published under the [mt-mods](https://content.minetest.net/users/mt-mods/) umbrella. 


## Art and Builds

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/ercavica.png"
    caption="Central Ercavica, a medieval city built by doggo on Tunnelers' Abyss, shot by CalebJ" %}

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_January/waltons.png"
    caption="An industrial facility in Walton's Forest, a 19th-century-themed city built by TomBuilder on Tunnelers' Abyss. Shot by pups." %}