---
layout: post
title: "May and June - Last Two Months in Minetest (14)"
contributors:
  - MisterE
  - rubenwardy
  - EmptyStar
  - Athozus
  - Lemente
  - CodeScratcher
description: >
  Desc Here
#forum_topic: https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29501
tags:
  - last_month
#image: /static/blog/2023_MayJune/header.png
asuna:
- src: /static/blog/2023_MayJune/asuna1.png
  caption: Shot taken by EmptyStar
- src: /static/blog/2023_MayJune/asuna2.png
  caption: Shot taken by EmptyStar
---

Desc Here

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Education](#education)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)

## Engine News

## Games News

### Asuna

{% include figure_gallery.html items=page.asuna %}

Asuna by EmptyStar welcomes the otherworldly wonders of the Everness mod to its
domain! From the sparkling vistas of the crystal forests, to the haunted bogs of
the cursed lands, down to the depths of its lush caves and icy caverns and
beyond, Everness is now a crown jewel of the Asuna experience. With a few
personal touches and careful placement into Asuna's fantastic fabric of biomes,
Everness graces every corner of the world.

Along with the inclusion of Everness, much work has been done to improve Asuna's
underground, other new biomes have been added, and landscapes are now more
diverse than ever. Join the new Asuna Discord server to keep up-to-date with
Asuna's development.

### BlockColor

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_MayJune/blockcolor.png"
    caption="Blocks and colors" %}

In an effort to preserve an interesting old game project, mt-historical has put
BlockColor by Mrchiantos on Content Database. The name says it all; its a bunch
of blocks in a soothing palette of colors.

## Mods News

### Mail

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_MayJune/mailmod.png"
    caption="New Mail Features" %}

Many servers rely on the Mail mod for in-game communication. Since the beginning
of the year, the Minetest Mods (mt-mods) organization developed many new
features and fixed several bugs using feedback from the YourLand server. They
also added translations for at least 6 new languages. The biggest new addition
is the sent messages folder, which required a complete rewrite of the storage
system (thanks to BuckarooBanzay).

Other new features include mailing lists, sorters and filters, drafts, multiple
message selection, and a new about page.

Most recently, the 1.2.0 release has brought settings, a trash system, and major
performance and bug fixes.

Contributers to the mail mod include S-S-X, BuckarooBanzay, fluxionary, and the YourLand server.

## Art and Builds

## Education

### Minestory

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_MayJune/minestory.png"
    caption="Minestory creates an opportunity for students to recreate national treasures in Minetest" %}

The Minestory event was hosted in Terrasson-Lavilledieu in France on May 31st.
Minestory was created in 2019 by Julien Crémoux, a teacher from France. Every
year, hundreds of students from schools in France and from across the world
replicate a heritage site from their area such as the Notre-Dame or the Louvre
castle on a Minetest server, and then give a virtual tour of their creation.
This year, 150 of the 413 participants visited the Lascaux caves nearby the
town, which are known for their prehistoric cave paintings. The next day,
Thomate, Riwad and Lemente organised a 10-minute workshop (one of 14 other
workshops) in which a minetest cave was decorated using the ggraffiti mod to
create simple cave paintings. The students were challenged to draw one of the
animals they saw depicted the previous day. The event was also an opportunity
for students to express their frustrations and ideas regarding edu projects.

## Server News

### Open Survival
<sub>minetest.skiscratcher.com:30000</sub>

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2023_MayJune/opensurvival.png"
    caption="A Fresh Start" %}

On June 14, 2023, Open Survival had a total reset. To cope with mod bloat and
the dwindling userbase of players who have already completed most of what there
is to do in the game, the Open Survival removed several mods and reset both the
world and the players.

## In Other News