---
layout: post
title: "Early Winter in Minetest (16)"
contributors:
  - Zughy
  - Rubenwardy
  - jordan4ibanez
  - Bituvo
authors:
  - MisterE
description: >
  Desc Here
tags:
  - last_month
image: /static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/header.jpg

# forum_topic: https://forum.minetest.net/viewtopic.php?f=18&t=29889

# pulls: https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull
# gallery_shaders:
# - src: /static/blog/2023_AugustSeptember/godrays.jpg
#   caption: Godrays through the trees
# - src: /static/blog/2023_AugustSeptember/reflections.jpg
#   caption: Screen-space water reflections
---

Desc Here

<!-- more -->

- [Engine News](#engine-news)
- [Games News](#games-news)
- [Mods News](#mods-news)
- [Art and Builds](#art-and-builds)
- [Server News](#server-news)
- [In Other News](#in-other-news)

## Engine News

### New core dev: Lars

The community welcomes Lars ([Github](https://github.com/appgurueu), [ContentDatabase](https://content.minetest.net/users/LMD/)), a longtime community
member, as the newest Core Dev. He is active in the effort to modernize
Minetest's mesh loader with the GLTF format, and has a PR to limit the observers
of objects, allowing entities to be hidden from players.

### Gamepad support and Dynamic tablet support

Progress is being made towards moving to SDL2 input support, which will allow
Minetest to be controlled with a gamepad, mouse and keyboard, or a touchscreen
on any platform. Gamepad support, and android support of mouse and keyboard
input, have been two major complaints over the years.

Additionally, work is being done to make it possible to switch between
touchscreen and mouse mode at runtime, which will allow tablets with
touchscreens or android devices to switch between modes at will, while playing.

See: [PR #14075](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/14075) and [PR #14146](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/14146)

### Code-defined Entity Animation Improvements

Lars [contributed new features](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/pull/12388) to entity model bone overrides, which allow
setting model bones' position, rotation, and scale in a relative and/or
interpolated manner. This finally allows smooth code-defined animations.

TODO: SCREENSHOT GIF OF INTERPOLATED MOVEMENT?

### Godrays Shaders

x2048's godrays shader implementation was adopted by lhofhansl and was merged
into Minetest 5.9-dev. 

TODO: SCREENSHOT OF GODRAYS

## Games News

### 2023 Game Jam Winners

The 2023 Game Jam was held in December. The theme was "Unexpected". Contestants had three weeks to make a game from scratch and submit it to Content Database. Then the community ranked their favorites on the new [Game Jam Site](jam.minetest.net). Here are your picks:

### 1st Place
### Citadel by Irevol

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/Citadel.png" caption='The Ruins of the Citadel' %}

Weave through the past and future in this 4-dimensional parkour puzzle game. You are a daring explorer who searches the ruins of an ancient citadel. You find mysterious runes which allow you to navigate the ages. Use your powers to navigate space and time and unearth the secrets and treasures of the Citadel.


### 2nd Place
### The Velvet Crystal by Regulus

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/velvet_crystal.png" caption='The mission begins.' %}

Recover the lost crystal and bring the light back into the world in this Parkour game with a twist. Use a wand to do stunts and to help you navigate the castle. Defeat the boss at the end to restore the light.

### 3rd place
### The Unexpected Gambit by NO11

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/gambit.png" caption='Your Move.' %}

Are you a chess Master? This unique chess experience will keep you on your toes with crazy moves that come at unexpected moments. The game is well-polished and executes the jam theme in an interesting way.


### Honorable Mentions:
Thanks to everyone who participated in the jam! Here are some other interesting projects that came out of the 2023 jam. We hope all the jam games will continue to recieve updates and become polished demonstrations of what Minetest can do while giving players great experiences.

### MineOS

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/mineos.png" caption='It can even run Boom!' %}

MineOS by jordan4ibanez is an astonishing demo, for those of us who are familiar with Minetest's GUI capabilities. It implements a polished Graphical operating system with retro sound effects and animations, and includes several windowed apps to play around with, including a 3d doom-like shooter. It certainly was unexpected.

### Shadow Forest

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/shadowForest.png" caption='The shadows are coming!' %}

Shadow Forest is a polished Role Playing game, where you are a wizard with a tight orb companion who follows you everywhere. It is your job to rid the forest of shadows which have invaded it. Use your weapons to defeat enemies, but don't become too caught up in battle and stall your progress through the world.

### Air Game

by wsor

*this section left intentionally blank*


## Mods News

### Automobiles Pack

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/vwbug.png" caption='Lovebug for Minetest.' %}

Apercy added a beetle car to his Automobiles Pack mod.

### TypeScript For Minetest

jordan4ibanez has created a Typescript modding system on top of the lua api using the TypeScriptToLua complier. He make a custom TypeScript typing system specifically for Minetest, and is using it in his project ForgottenLands.

## Art and Builds

### Digilines Computer

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/digilines_comp.png" caption=' The ventilated computer with several commands executed on its large screenn, by Bituvo. The digilines computer can be found on the server "Eden Lost". From spawn, go to the "travelnets" section, and go to the first travelnet on the right labelled "Thresher". Visit the "Computer" station.
' %}


## Server News


## Other News

### Minetest at Events in December

In late 2023, Minetest was featured at several conventions around Italy thanks
to Zughy and his sponsor Italian Linux Society. Zughy has brought Minetest to
several events in Northern and Central Italy from underground videogame
festivals like [Zona Warpa](https://www.zonawarpa.it/) to Free software events like [MERGE-it](https://merge-it.net/). He demoed games
and gave talks (you can listen one of them [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KBZoPYleoX4), in spaghetti language 🍝 ). In
December Zughy also presented a workshop at Empoli for the first time, where
participants learned how to create a complete minigame from scratch using
[arena_lib](https://content.minetest.net/packages/Zughy/arena_lib/). It doesn't seem like these events are going to stop. What's next?
FOSDEM!

## FOSDEM 2024

Minetest will be at FOSDEM 2024. FOSDEM is the largest conference in Europe for
free and open source software, and will be held from 3-4th February in Brussels,
Belgium. We'll be running a booth, showing off Minetest, giving out stickers and
goodies, and introducing visitors to the Minetest!

If you happen to be in the area, come out to show your support!

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/2024_EarlyWinter/minetest_at_freenode_live_2018.jpg" caption='Minetest at Freenode Live in 2018' %}

See: [FOSSDEM stands this year](https://fosdem.org/2024/news/2023-11-20-accepted-stands-fosdem-2024/)

## Contributing to Minetest

Want to contribute to Minetest and don't know where to start? 
Try with [these simple issues](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22)!

Want to help fix the [most annoying bugs]((https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3ABug+label%3A%22High+priority%22)) for the community? Please do! 

Want to add a feature and you're not sure if it will be accepted? Have a look at
the [roadmap](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/blob/master/doc/direction.md) or [choose an issue with the "Supported by core dev" label](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Supported+by+core+dev%22)!

Are you a professional artist or UI designer? Help us make our main menu more
appealing and [help create an identity for Minetest](https://github.com/minetest/minetest/issues/6733)!